
In the previous video, we introduced several ideas
and issues at play when implementing
quantum simulations on a quantum computer.
Simulation begins with a representation
of the system being simulated, and once we
have this representation we can then choose how to simulate it.
Quantum systems are generally defined
in terms of a mathematical representation called
a Hamiltonian.
And with a Hamiltonian in hand, as you learned in course one,
one can simulate the Hamiltonian dynamics using universal gates.
This is called a digital simulator.
Alternatively, one can use the qubits and the couplings
to mimic the system and its Hamiltonian directly.
This is called an analog simulator or an emulator.
In either case, we need to define the simulation problem
in terms of a Hamiltonian, which characterizes
our system of interest.
And so that leads us to the subject of this video, what
is a Hamiltonian?
A Hamiltonian is a mathematical construct
that can be used to describe the time evolution of a system.
Now these systems can be classical,
like a ball rolling off a table, or they
can be quantum mechanical, like the qubits We've been looked
at throughout the course.
This sounds pretty abstract, so let's take a look
at how to use a Hamiltonian more concretely.
If you've taken a high school physics class,
you might remember how to predict
the motion of an object using Newton's laws.
First you write down all the forces acting on your system,
taking note both the strength and direction of each force.
We can keep track of all these forces using a free body
diagram, like the one shown here.
Once we've written down all the forces,
we can invoke one of the fundamental laws of physics.
Newton's second law of motion tells us
that the sum of all the forces acting on a system
is equal to the mass of the system multiplied
by its acceleration.
Now this equation is extremely powerful.
Recall that acceleration is the rate of change of velocity
with respect to time, like your car going from 0 to 60 miles
an hour on the highway.
Meanwhile, velocity is simply the rate
of change in an object's position with respect to time.
So we can rewrite our acceleration
as the second derivative of the system's position with respect
to time.
When we make the substitution to Newton's second law,
we see that we now have a differential equation, which
relates the second time derivative of position
to the sum of the forces acting on our system.
These forces can be constant or they
can be some function of the position of our system.
When we solve this differential equation,
we get an equation x of t, which tells us
the position of our system at any arbitrary time.
OK.
So we've used the forces acting on our system to figure out
how it moves in time.
As it turns out, this isn't the only method
we can use to arrive at the exact same result.
Now instead of thinking of the forces acting on our system,
let's focus on the energy of our system.
Generally, a system has two types
of energy, kinetic energy, the energy that
comes from a system's motion, and potential energy,
the latent energy stored in the system waiting
to be converted into motion.
Let's write down each of these energies as equations.
A systems kinetic energy is equal to its momentum
squared divided by 2 times its mass.
Momentum, you might remember, is related to an object's speed.
So the faster an object moves, the more kinetic energy it has.
A systems potential energy depends on the forces
that it is experiencing.
So we need to know exactly what forces we're dealing with
and order to write down an exact equation.
However, in general, we can say that our potential energy
is some function of our systems position,
just like our forces were.
OK.
So we have two types of energy, one
which depends on the system's momentum,
and one which depends on its position.
Let's add these two energies together
to get an expression for the total energy stored
in our system.
This expression for the total energy in our system
is called its Hamiltonian.
And as you can see, the Hamiltonian
depends on two parameters, position and momentum.
These two parameters have a special role in physics
and we call them the canonical coordinates of our system.
So why is the Hamiltonian important?
As it turns out, just as we previously used Newton's laws
to find the motion of our system in time from a set of forces,
we can use our Hamiltonian to arrive
at the exact same result.
To do this, we invoke two extremely elegant equations
known as Hamilton's equations.
The first equation tells us that the rate
of change of our systems' position in time
will be equal to the derivative of its Hamiltonian
with respect to momentum.
Symmetrically, the second equation
then tells us that the rate of change of our systems
momentum in time is equal to the derivative of its Hamiltonian
with respect to position.
Just like Newton's laws, these are differential equations,
and if we solve these equations, we
arrive at expressions which tell us how our systems position
and momentum change in time.
With these expressions in hand, we can see where our system is
and how fast it's moving at any arbitrary time.
To summarize, as long as we have the Hamiltonian of our system
and an initial set of conditions,
we can calculate exactly how the system will evolve in time.
OK.
So far everything we just discussed
has referred to classical systems.
What about quantum systems?
The formalism of Hamiltonian physics
is the architecture of quantum mechanics.
Just like in classical mechanics,
we can write down the total energy of our quantum system
as a Hamiltonian.
This Hamiltonian is simply the sum
of our systems kinetic and potential energies as
in the classical case.
However, note one minor difference.
Whereas in the classical case, our Hamiltonian
was a scalar function of our systems momentum and position,
in quantum mechanics, our Hamiltonian
takes on the form of a quantum operator, which
acts on a given quantum state.
We now invoke a fundamental relationship
of quantum mechanics.
The operation of a Hamiltonian on a given quantum state
is equal to the rate of change of that state in time.
This relationship is called Schrodinger's equation,
and it tells us that if we know the operator
responsible for the energy of our system, that
is our Hamiltonian, we can solve for the evolution
of that state in time.
For this reason, we often say that the Hamiltonian
generates the dynamics of a quantum system.
Let's look at how to use our Hamiltonian more
concretely in quantum mechanics.
Imagine that our quantum system is a single qubit.
We can write the state of our qubit as a vector with two
entries, A and B, which correspond
to the probability of measuring the system, either at a 0 or 1
state at a given time.
Just like in our classical example,
the exact form of our Hamiltonian
depends entirely on what forces that are acting on our qubit.
However, in general, we can always
write the Hamiltonian of a qubit as a two
by two Hermitian matrix.
A Hermitian matrix is a special type
of square matrix, which is equal to its own conjugate transpose.
When we plug our state vector and Hamiltonian matrix
into Schrodinger's equation, we get
two linearly independent differential equations,
which can be solved to find the values of A and B
at any arbitrary time.
Now when we solve these differential equations,
we find that for an arbitrary Hamiltonian,
an initial state, psi 0, the quantum state at time,
t, will be equal to the complex exponential, e to the iHt time
our initial state, psi 0.
Recall that I just said our Hamiltonian is a Hermitian
matrix.
When you work out the math, you can show that e to the iHt
is a new matrix, which is unitary.
By this point in the course, we're
already intimately familiar with unitary operators,
like x, y, and z rotations or Hadamard gates.
We can now see where these gates physically come from.
To implement a particular qubit gate,
we must engineer a qubit with the correct Hamiltonian,
and apply it for the right amount of time, such
that the evolution of our state produces the unitary operator
that we need.
So we just showed how to solve for the dynamics
of a single qubit.
Let's see how this problem scales
when we try solving for the dynamics of many qubits.
To represent a system of n qubits,
we need a state vector with 2 to the n entries,
corresponding to each of the possible states
we might measure the system in.
To generate the dynamics of this quantum state,
we need a Hamiltonian matrix with 2 to the n by 2
to the n entries.
Indeed, as we add more qubits to our system,
the number of matrix elements that we need to keep
track of in our Hamiltonian scales exponentially.
To make matters worse, if we actually
want to solve for the dynamics of our system,
we then need to exponentiate this massive matrix, which
is an extremely computationally demanding operation.
As we can see, solving for the dynamics of an arbitrary
quantum state is an exponential hard problem classically.
This observation has profound consequences,
and as we'll see throughout this week,
provides the primary motivation for quantum simulation
on a quantum computer.
