
Let's start with the energy graph
of a simple diatomic molecule.
When the atoms are close too each other,
the repulsion between the individual nuclei
dominates the energy of the system
and leads to an unstable configuration.
At the other extreme is the case when
the two atoms are dissociated.
The point of minimum energy, though,
is the equilibrium configuration,
when the atoms are separated by the bond distance.
Evaluating these energies to high accuracy
is extremely crucial for accurately predicting
chemical reaction rates and pathways
and developing insights into molecular structure.
The evaluation of these energies essentially
comes down to solving the Schrodinger equation,
with the following electronic Hamiltonian, which
captures the electronic kinetic energies and the Coulomb
interaction between pairs of electrons and nuclei,
as well as pairs of electrons.
However, this eigenvalue problem is one with exponential cost
when addressed by classical computation.
And this was indeed one of the initial motivations
for quantum computers, the idea that one
could use a highly controllable programmable quantum
processor to efficiently study and predict the properties
of quantum systems of interest.
The first step of such simulations,
then, involves encoding the problem to the quantum
processor, in our specific case, mapping the electronic orbitals
onto qubits.
One then needs an algorithm that solves the eigenvalue problem
to evaluate the ground state energy.
In this context, hybrid quantum classical algorithms with
[? shocked-up ?] circuits, such as the variational quantum
eigensolver, are well-suited to the capabilities of existing
hardware.
Here, the trials, or guesses, to the ground state
are prepared on the quantum processor, parametrized
by some experimental controls [INAUDIBLE]..
The energy of these states is then measured and fed
to an optimization routine run on a classical computer that
updates these parameters to attempt a new trial state.
And this is now run its iteratively,
till the energy converges towards its minimum value.
This raises three important questions
for implementing this algorithm.
Are there encoding schemes that are
efficient towards the number of qubits required?
Are there trials states that are efficient towards the number
of gates required while faithfully representing
the ground state of the molecule?
This is important since this can help
reduce the effect of decoherence during the state preparation.
Finally, are there classical optimization routines
that can effectively deal with the large number
of [? variational ?] parameters and experimental lines?
These were all important components
of a recent experiment at IBM.
Taking advantage of natural symmetries
in the molecular Hamiltonian, we were
able to encode eight orbitals of beryllium hydride
onto a reduced number of 6 qubits
at no loss of information.
Also, we constructed trial states
that used layers of untangling gates that are naturally
accessible to the experimental hardware, which are then
interleaved with arbitrary Euler rotations.
The circuit dept or the number of entangling layers
is then set based on the available quantum
coherence of the hardware.
Making efficient use of coherence time and qubit
resources, these states are dubbed hardware-efficient trial
states.
Using such trial states, we were able to perform
energy minimizations of up to 6-qubit Hamiltonians.
Here is one such example.
In the classical optimization routine,
13 Euler angles, which serve as the variation of parameters,
are simultaneously updated as the local reading
is approximated using solely two energy measurements
by iteration, shown here in red and blue.
The iterations are stopped once the energy flattens out
towards its minimum.
Using these techniques, we were able to address
different electronic structure problems of fairly
elementary molecules using 2 qubits for hydrogen,
4 qubits for lithium hydride, and 6 qubits for beryllium
hydride.
These are problems that are small enough
to solve even on a laptop.
However, a big motivation for this work
is to be able to understand the sources of error
and when addresses these problems using
the normal paradigm of computing,
using real quantum hardware.
And by comparing the experimental results, shown
in these black dots with numerical simulations
of the noisy device, we see the decoherence
at insufficient circuit depth are
some of the important sources of error.
So now this raises the question, in the absence of quantum error
correction, is there a way to do something meaningful with
[? near-term ?] hardware?
Is it possible to obtain estimates
for, say, these energies in the absence of incoherent noise,
despite using a noisy quantum processor?
Turns out there is--
with metals that we call error mitigation.
If there is an easy way to amplify
the strength of the noise and then
we measure the expectation values of interest,
we can then use a powerful numerical technique [INAUDIBLE]
an extrapolation to obtain a zero-noise estimate.
Here is a case of two wrongs making a right.
In contrast to quantum error correction that has a resource
requirement that's perhaps beyond near-term hardware,
this error mitigation technique is fairly accessible
since it doesn't require any additional quantum resources.
Now, is there a way for us to controllability amplify
the strength of the noise?
For instance warming up our dilution refrigerator, which
houses the superconducting processor,
certainly increases decoherence.
But there isn't really a precise way
of scaling the noise strength?
However, an alternate more accessible approach
involves rescaling the dynamics of the state preparation.
This can be shown to be equivalent to amplifying
the strength of the noise if the noise is
constant over the duration of the [? rescale ?] measurements.
Let's now revisit the molecular simulation of lithium hydride
with 4 qubits.
The original experiments used just [? depth-one ?] circuits
to reduce the effect of decoherence.
More recently, the mitigation of errors from decoherence
enables the benefit of longer computations
with increased circuit depth, to achieve accuracies
that were otherwise believed to be
beyond the scope of the noisy superconducting processor.
Although discussed with specific examples of quantum chemistry,
the variational algorithms and error mitigation techniques
discussed here can be extended to a host of different problems
that rely on computations with expectation values--
problems in quantum simulation addressing fundamental particle
physics and condensed matter physics,
and even problems in optimization and machine
learning.
These techniques will likely be crucial to enhance
the quality of quantum computation and simulation
in this era of noisy intermediate-scale quantum
computers.
