
Over the past two weeks, we looked
at how quantum computers running Shor's algorithm
enable us to compromise conventional encryption
schemes, such as the RSA cryptosystem.
And we also saw how quantum mechanics provides
a workaround, via quantum cryptography and quantum
key distribution.
This week, we'll turn our attention
to the subject of quantum simulation.
It was Feynman's original insight
that, if we want to simulate a quantum system,
we'd better use a quantum system to do it,
because it's a really hard problem
for a classical computer to solve.
This is due to the exponentially large number of quantum states
that we need to keep track of.
But what does it mean to simulate a quantum system,
and how do we represent the quantum system that we
want to simulate?
And what does quantum mechanics do
to make these simulations tractable?
Further, what can go wrong?
We'll address these questions this week,
and review several applications based on quantum simulation.
But to get started, let's first hear from Professor Isaac
Chuang about ideas and issues associated
with quantum simulation.
Some of the issues and the challenges when
working through quantum simulation,
first, you would like to have, in principle, the knowledge
that you can do the simulation.
And the way one approaches this is to define the problem
by saying the goal is to simulate Hamiltonian--
we'll call the Hsys--
but you're given a different set of Hamiltonians,
not just one Hamiltonian, but a whole family
of them, which will be the Hamiltonian
of the quantum computing units.
Like each of the gates or each of the subsystems.
And you can turn them on and off at will.
Then the question is, in a mathematical way,
whether or not HkQC can generate Hsys.
Mathematically, this is a beautiful group theory question
about whether the algebra of Hsys
is spanned by the algebra of H quantum computer.
But this is the starting point for quantum computation
or quantum simulation.
A second idea and issue is how does one
transform this kind of a set of Hamiltonians into the system
that you would like to simulate.
And one of the earliest approaches of this
is to use analog techniques, which
go under the name, for example, of analog deformation.
And that is that you might have a Hamiltonian which
has a number of terms, and your strategy
would be then to manipulate these, deform
them to make this Hamiltonian look like this one,
for example, in a time-averaged way or in a strobostopic way.
So for example, at every time capital T, 2T, 3T, 4T,
and so forth, you would like this Hamiltonian
to equal that Hamiltonian, not at all times.
And this is the strategy and approach, for example,
employed by ultracold atom gases,
Bose-Einstein condensates, when they're
being utilized to simulate, for example, a superconducting
system.
And that naturally works out, in many ways,
because they can be controlled to have similar Hamiltonians.
And the Bose-Einstein condensate is very controllable,
and you can get an equivalent lattice spacing that's
much larger than the physical lattice spacing of atoms
inside a superconducting solid.
And so you can engineer the kind of Hamiltonian
you would like your quantum computer
to simulate in many rich ways.
So this has been a very effective and useful approach.
Here's another idea and challenge, though.
Even if you can simulate-- so this is in principle,
this is one method by which you can simulate--
you're still faced by a rather annoying and pressing challenge
and question, which is what to measure.
Even if I just tell you, you can simulate.
So if I say, you're given some state which
is e to the minus iht times some initial state,
if you measure this, it collapses.
And then you get only one statistical sample
of that wave function.
Does that tell you what you want?
Does that give you an actual output?
And what are its statistical errors?
Because after all, nothing is real unless it's reproducible.
And in Junior Physics Lab here, those of you
who've taken Junior Lab know nothing
is real unless it has an error bar.
You don't get an error bar from a single instance of something.
But if you have to repeat this many times, your errors now,
normally, if there's just a lot of large numbers
distributed, going to decrease as the square root
of the number of tries.
And that often isn't good enough,
because you don't want to try an exponentially large number
of times.
But naively, this is what you would have to do here.
So maybe what you want to do is not to measure the state.
Maybe what you would like to get is some expectation value
of some operator.
And maybe it's going to be easier to measure that operator
than it is to, say, get all the coefficients of a wave
function.
But even this is fraught with difficulty
because it still has the statistical randomness
that we just described.
This is an issue of precision.

And I will try to illustrate this issue with the Grover
algorithm simulation topic that we'll come to in two steps.
And then let me leave you with one more issue and idea,
which is--
and this is kind of outside of the scope of quantum simulation
of quantum, but it is a very real one
for quantum simulations.
Instead of building a quantum simulator, why not just improve
your classical simulation of the quantum system
by using a better approximation?

And this approximation might be a quantum-inspired
approximation.

And this actually has happened over the last decade or so.
A whole variety of new approximations
have come because of quantum computation that allow you more
efficient classical algorithms.
And these have swept through condensed matter theory,
and are now entering into the realm of quantum chemistry.
And they go by a variety of names.
The technique that started all of this in physics
was the density matrix renormalization group
idea, which was awarded the Nobel
Prize, Ken Wilson and company.
But now, we have many more advanced techniques.
So not just DMRG--
and I'll toss out a bunch of acronyms here,
for those of you interested in this--
but also things like PEPS, MERA, and all sorts of things.
You know you're entering chemistry when all you see
are acronyms.
These are real ways of getting very useful, highly
accurate approximations to answers that you want
to find in quantum chemistry.
