
In the previous video, we discussed the quantum
simulation of a particle in a box,
and towards the end of the video,
we previewed an important technique
for quantum simulation called Trotterization.
In this video, we're going to take a closer
look at Trotterization and see why
it's such an important tool for quantum simulations.
Now, as we've already seen, the first step
in quantum simulation is to write down
the Hamiltonian, which governs the dynamics of the system we
want to simulate.
And the Hamiltonian's generally separated into different terms
corresponding to the different types of energy in the system--
for example, the kinetic and potential energies.
Or for systems of many qubits, we
might instead use a sum of single qubit energies
plus terms which correspond to qubit-qubit interactions.
However we define the Hamiltonian,
the goal of our quantum simulation
is to take an initial quantum state psi at time t0
and find out where it ends up at a later time t.
And as we introduced in the "What is a Hamiltonian?"
video, the state psi at time t results from the initial state
psi 0 acted upon by the operator e to the iHt
where H is the Hamiltonian.
Now, e to the iHt is a unitary operator
and, in principle, it can be decomposed
into a series of qubit gates and placed
into a block in the circuit diagram.
However, these operations may be hard to realize in practice.
Alternatively, we can break our Hamiltonian
into pieces that are more tractable to implement,
such as single-qubit rotations and elementary two-qubit gates.
To get started, let's say we have
a Hamiltonian H that can be broken into two terms, H0
and H1.
And while H is very difficult to implement,
H0 and H1 are much easier.
So how can we use these simpler terms to implement
the total Hamiltonian H?
Now, you might think that we can simply implement these two
terms as two sequential time evolutions,
each acting on the system for the total time t,
and then we're done.
However, unfortunately, this doesn't work.
While it's certainly true that H equals H0 plus H1,
it's not necessarily true that e to the iHt equals
e to the iH0t times e to the iH1t.
This is because, in general, the operators H0 and H1 do not
commute with one another.
Commutation is a mathematical concept
that we take for granted in basic arithmetic.
Basically, we can multiply numbers in any order
and still get the same answer.
For example, 3 times 6 is equal to 6 times 3.
The order in which we multiply doesn't matter.
Because we can rearrange the numbers
on either side of the multiplication sign,
we say that multiplication of scalar numbers is commutative
and that these numbers commute.
Now, it turns out, this statement is not always true
for quantum operators.
As we saw in course 1, we can represent quantum operators
as unitary matrices.
To check if multiplication still commutes,
let's consider two elementary quantum operators, the z and x
operators.
When we multiply these matrices, it's
clear that z times x does not equal x times z.
Therefore, in general, operator matrix multiplication
does not obey the commutative property,
and we say that the operators z and x do not
commute with one another.
This means that order matters when we apply
these operators to qubits.
Change the order, and you get a different outcome.
Now, returning to our Hamiltonian problem,
we see that implementing H0 first and then H1
will give us a different result than if we first
implemented H1 and then H0.
So how can we take advantage of the simpler terms, H0 and H1,
and simulate the full Hamiltonian?
This is where the concept called Trotterization comes in.
The Suzuki-Trotter method, or Trotterization for short,
takes advantage of a clever decomposition of matrices which
allows us to simulate the action of a Hamiltonian
using only its constituent pieces.
Instead of just breaking our Hamiltonian into two terms
and evolving each for the full time t,
we'll also break the time evolution into n small pieces
and run each evolution for a small fraction t
over n of the total time t.
We'll then repeatedly implement this smaller
interleaved evolution a total of n times
such that, by the end of the protocol,
the system is evolved for the full time t.
And as we make n larger and larger--
that is, as we make the stepwise evolution smaller and smaller,
the Trotterization procedure becomes
equivalent to evolving the original Hamiltonian
H for the full time t.
This remarkable relationship is known as the Trotter equation.
By breaking the Hamiltonian time evolution into small pieces
and toggling between each term of the Hamiltonian,
Trotterization enables us to simulate the full Hamiltonian
evolution using only its constituent
terms, even if those terms don't commute with one another.
And as a result, this concept is a powerful, almost universally
applicable, approach to the simulation of quantum systems
and their dynamical evolution.
