
We have taken H.
We have modeled it with some simplified h prime.
Then the two pathways the community has taken,
which are rather distinct, is first to utilize
what you've already learned in this class, which is the phase
estimation algorithm.
And this will give you the ground state
and the energy of the ground state approximately.
The second approach does something different
and is known as a variational quantum eigensolver.
And you will now find the literature replete with people
talking about the VQE algorithm.
And I want you to know what it is because there's
a lot of talk about that.
And this will give you a state psi,
which might be if you're lucky close
to the ground state, and an energy,
which might be if you're lucky, the ground state
but has a certain guarantee that this energy will
be no smaller than the ground state energy
that you're looking for.
So let's look at these two different routes one at a time.

The first approach, phase estimation,
is very simple to understand as I described
because it is no more than the application of phase
estimation.

We start with registered qubits, where
you're going to store the eigen energy.
So this is determined by the imprecision
that you want the number of qubits.
You start out also with a state psi, which
is some approximation of the ground state,
but you don't know how good.
So it's the ground state plus epsilon
times some other component, which is
orthogonal to the ground state.
And allow me that you have prepare this somehow.
And you may prepare it badly.
That's still OK.
What you do is you perform--
remember this is going to be some sum over all values k.
You perform a controlled h to the k operation over here.
This is feasible because I've shown you how to trotterize.
But this is really, really painful
because you now have to trod right
and also trod right to the kth power.
So now you have to rerun that [? troderization ?]
an exponentially large number of a span of energy, for example.
But allow me this.
And we know from the phase estimation algorithm
that what you get as the output of this
is going to be a sum over energy eigenstates and then phases,
which are on the order of some constant over e sub k.
So these are going to give you the energies of the system.
This is the top register, and this is the bottom register.
And there are some coefficients.
And when you measure this top register after the quantum
Fourier transform, you collapse into an eigenstate down here.
And if your initial overlap is sufficiently large,
so epsilon is small, then you get the ground state
that you desire.
And you will have a measure, which is the energy eigenstate.
But by the way, this is exactly Shor's algorithm.
This is a quantum factoring algorithm also being
used for quantum simulation.
It's actually not accidental that all known exponentially
fast algorithms today, quantum algorithms
are essentially the structure of Shore's factoring algorithm.
You put something in superposition.
You do control something to a higher power
based on the superposition.
You do the inverse quantum Fourier transform.
So if you know Shore's factoring algorithm,
you essentially know this whole route to quantum simulation.
Why is this challenging?
Well, first it's good because you
get the eigenstate and eigen energy, the ground state,
right away.
But the challenge is that you need a perfect quantum computer
with long coherence times.
There's a beautiful analysis of the requirements by Matthias
Troyer and company from [INAUDIBLE] now at Microsoft,
where he shows that if one uses this phase estimation approach,
one has a chance of simulating nitrogenase exactly what I
started today's lecture on.
If you can run the quantum computer
for about a day with a relatively fast clock cycle
as well, the longest coherence time
we have for many of our quantum bits like in superconductors
is on the order of a millisecond.
And for ions, it's perhaps tens of seconds.
So a day's a bit of a stretch right now.
And this might need something on the order of a million qubits
as well, whereas in our actual deliverable common computers,
companies are talking about maybe 50 qubits today.
So that gives you an idea of the gap
between the ideal system needed and that
which is actually available.
