
Let's work through something concrete.
First, I would like to show you the example of a particle
in a one-dimensional well.
This is entry-level quantum mechanics.
And I start at this point because you're
very familiar with it, and it will
let me illustrate the first two steps in a quantum simulation
process.
Imagine that you have a particle located
on a one-dimensional axis, and there
is some potential, V of x.
The somewhere delocalized in here.
Let the scale of this heat from minus d to plus d or so.
And the particle is governed by a Hamiltonian,
which is of the form p squared over 2m plus V of x.
So this is the energy of a free particle, the kinetic energy.
This is he potential energy.
This is the set of T terms, and this is the set of V terms
that are canonical in a molecule as well.
This is a very simplistic scenario,
but it's not all that far away from the more complicated
molecular Hamiltonian.
And the first step that one employs
in simulating the dynamics of this physical system
is to discretize.
So normally, we'll have some continuous set
over the infinite one-dimensional axis.
So you can imagine that these are some coefficients
that you have.
So this has now expanded into eigen basis of position x.
And the natural thing for us to do
is to replace this with something discrete, like k
delta x, so that this is in some way now going
to be a sum over some coefficients,
C sub k of k delta x where we choose the delta x
to be sufficiently small and defined over
this discrete interval from minus d to d.
So many of you have done this, especially
if you're doing a computer simulation of such
a particle in a potential.
It should be very comfortable.
The second thing that you do is to be
able to simulate the Hamiltonian.
So you evolve the system.
Now, how does one evolve a system under a Hamiltonian?
The problem is that this Hamiltonian here
is comprised of two parts, H1 and H2, and they don't commute.
Just let my evolution, e to the minus i h t--
I cannot simply let this be e to the minus i h1 t e to the minus
i h2 t.
I cannot evolve with one Hamiltonian then evolve with
a second Hamiltonian, even though they're added here,
because they do not commute with each other.
And this should be something you're very familiar with.
And therefore, we have to apply an approximation.
The approximation we apply in order
to simulate this some of the Hamiltonians
is the Lie Product formula, which says that in the limit
as I take an infinite number of partitions of e
to the i h1 t divided by n, e to the minus i
h2 t divided by n, where I evolve
by the first Hamiltonian for a small sliver of time,
t divided by n, then the second one for another small sliver
of time.
Repeat this many times, taking the slivers
to become smaller and smaller.
This gives us an equality, which is the sum of the two
Hamiltonians.
Now, this is a beautiful mathematical fact.
Unfortunately, when we do our actual simulation,
we have to truncate it at some point,
and errors start to pop in.
And when we truncate it at a certain point
this method is called Trotterization.
