
So now we come to the second approach.
The point of this second approach, VQE,
is to get by with a much poorer, worse quantum computer
by not asking for quite as much, and you'll
see how that works by my describing the algorithm.
The point of this argument is to rely
upon the variational principle, which in this context
says that if I'm given some state, psi, which is not
the ground state, and I measure the expectation
value of the Hamiltonian, this full total Hamiltonian
with respect to that state, I will get some expectation value
average energy, which is no smaller than the energy
of the ground state.
So therefore, I might do something like introduce
a bunch of parameters here.
Let's call these theta.
So theta 1, theta 2, theta 3, and say
I use the thetas to manipulate the degrees of freedom I
have in the input state to this expectation value.

Then again, it will also be no smaller than that.
So I might define this thing as an expectation value of H
parameterized by some thetas.
You can do this on a classical computer,
but the hardest part about the classical computation
is preparing this state and then computing this matrix element
of H with that state.
And the VQE algorithm proposes to do those two
steps on a quantum computer.
And the rest, it does with a classical computer.
So here are the steps.
Prepare psi of theta, where theta
it is controlled by a classical algorithm,
and this is done on a quantum computer.
easure this H of theta, and there are many ways
of doing this measurement.
One of which I will describe in a moment,
if we have time on a quantum computer.
And then third, take this classical measurement result
that you now have, and run a optimization algorithm.

For example, the Nelder-Mead simplex algorithm,
or stochastic gradient descent, or you
choose your favorite optimization algorithm,
changing theta to minimize each of theta.

And go back to the beginning, and this is
done on a classical computer.
So now we have a hybrid, where we
have a quantum computer executing some steps,
and a classical computer executing some other steps.
And in fact, you can show that this kind
of a variational expectation value
is true even if you have a natty density matrix here, instead
of a pure state.
So if your quantum computer starts to devolve and go not
so quantum on you half way through,
it still cannot give you an expectation value that's better
than the ground state.
And there are various versions of these sets of theorems,
which apply to variances in other quantities
that you might want to measure.
And so, one can try to assert, although it's largely
done without proof today, that this argument will still
work reasonably OK on a noisy quantum computer with not so
good quantum bits.
And therefore, companies can deliver to you a product which
is a quantum computer with poor quantum bits,
and still expect you to pay a lot of money
for it because it could run this algorithm
and give you some result. There are not many proofs
that it will do so, but it is a very compelling argument
and a very interesting direction.
And there are now experimental results
showing small one and two gigabit quantum computers
doing exactly these steps, the variational quantum
eigensolver.
So the challenge of this, there are two,
I would point out most.
First, does this expectation value converge?

You have to rely upon this classical optimization
algorithm to get you better and better values.
But you don't have a proof that you actually
got the lowest possible value, or the desired ground state.
Second, this state preparation.
It's unclear how this state is actually prepared.
There are some ideas of how to prepare this.

For example, with adiabatic quantum computation.
You start with a beginning Hamiltonian,
which you can create, and try to construct an end
Hamiltonian whose ground state is this state that you
want to create.
And since you have this parametrized in principle,
you have some means by which you can do that.
This parameter, by the way, could be things, for example,
like the adiabatic path that you use in the quantum computer.
OK.
And related to this first challenge is how you measure H.
And one way people have done this
is to measure the terms of H.
So you can say this is actually equal
to the average expectation value of H1 plus plus H2,
plus all the way up to however many terms there are in here.
So you can measure, in principle, the expectation
value turn by turn in the Hamiltonian.
And if the Hamiltonian terms are simple, like polymatrices,
then you have a feasible way of doing it.
Unfortunately, that means that you also now added the error
from each one of these expectation values,
and so the error can grow very, very rapidly as you're
trying to estimate the expectation value this way.
Still, the variational quantum eigensolver is different.
We haven't looked at any kind of algoritm
like that in class in this semester.
How do you utilize a system which
has a quantum computer and a classical computer
together, so that you can get something of the best of both
of the systems?
How can you make them work in concert, so that one hands off
information to the other one so that now you
can feedback, and try to speed up,
while only have a limited amount of quantum coherence
and a limited number of qubits at your disposal?
I think this is a fascinating topic.
I want to leave you with that challenge,
and I want to also leave you with the challenge of thinking
about how you can relate Hamiltonians and quantum
algorithms.
