
This week, we'll take a look at quantum algorithms and quantum
communication.
We'll start by considering the promise of these technologies,
what is needed to realize that promise, how to get there
and where we are today.
Let's begin with quantum algorithms and the promise
of quantum computers.
As we discussed earlier, quantum computers
are not smaller, faster versions of classical computers,
nor are they an incremental step in the evolution
of Moore's law.
Rather, quantum computing represents
a fundamentally new approach to processing information.
And it's the only computing model we know of today
that's qualitatively different from existing computers.
This difference and the potential promise of a quantum
computer is reflected in the fact
that simulating a quantum computer
using a classical computer requires exponential overhead.
This means that, as we add one qubit to our quantum computer,
the size of the classical computer required to
simulate it will grow exponentially.
Now we don't often experience exponential growth
in our everyday lives, and so, to gain
an intuition for how powerful it can be
you may remember the old riddle where your employer asks you
how would you like to be paid this month,
and you have two choices.
Either I'll start you with one penny,
and then each day for one month I'll
double the number of pennies, and you can keep the pennies
from the last day.
Or you can have $1 million.
Now, it's quite normal to think through the first few days
of pennies.
For example, two pennies on day one, four pennies on day two,
double that to eight pennies on day three.
And you begin to think that $1 million
is starting to look pretty good.
But in fact, if you take that $1 million,
you've lost a lot of money because the number of pennies
is growing exponentially as 2 to the n-th power,
where n is the number of days.
So on the 31st day, the last day of the month,
you have 2 to the 31 pennies.
And that's equivalent to about $21 million.
That's the power of exponential growth.
Returning to computing, if we consider the amount of memory
we would need to store all of the available states
in the state space of a quantum computer
we'll similarly see the immensity
of exponential growth.
For example, representing all of the quantum states of just 30
qubits would require at least a very powerful laptop.
Increase that to just 40 qubits and now you
need a supercomputer.
Double that to just 80 qubits and you
would need all of the classical computers we have on Earth.
And then double that again to 160 qubits,
and now you need all of the silicon atoms on Earth.
Even small increases in the number of qubits
translates to exponential growth in the amount of memory
required to represent all 2 to the n numbers
that n qubits can store.
So there's clearly a big difference
between classical and quantum computers.
And this suggests the potential for substantial quantum
advantage.
But what is needed to realize this in practice?
Basically, to realize a quantum advantage,
we need to identify the intersection
of three key requirements.
First, we'd like to identify a useful problem, one
that has practical importance.
Second, this problem shouldn't have
a known fast classical algorithm to solve it.
Otherwise we might as well just use a classical computer.
And then third, the problem must have a known fast quantum
algorithm, one that offers a substantial speed up.
Now, this sounds great, but in fact, this promise
has been largely empty, except for a small area of overlap
that we know about today.
Nonetheless, there are useful problems with a quantum
advantage, and this improvement can
be quantified using a mathematical expression.
One place is in the prefactor of that expression,
and one place is in the exponential.
The prefactor A can be a large fixed number
or it can scale polynomially with the number of qubits n.
The exponential scaling of a problem of size n
is in the exponential factor.
Either of these two types of improvement
can indicate quantum advantage.
And in the following sections, we'll
compare several algorithms and their respective speedup.
