In the last section, we
introduced several algorithms, including
those like Shor's and Grover's algorithm, that are useful
now if we can build a quantum computer that's
large enough and robust enough to run the algorithm.
We also looked at quantum simulation,
a very promising set of algorithms which,
when realized, has the potential for substantial economic impact
and may even find utility on today's smaller scale
non-error corrected machines.
And we looked at a few potentially useful algorithms
currently under development.
For each of these examples, let's now
look at the resource requirements
for implementing an algorithm on both a classical and a quantum
computer.
This will then show the degree of quantum advantage
one can obtain by using the quantum computer.
We'll also identify the leading limitations
as they're currently known for realizing this advantage.
Let's take them in order of their applicability
as we see it today.
In this chart, we show the algorithm in the first column.
Then columns two and three show the resources
required to implement the algorithm
on a classical computer and on a quantum computer.
Now, more precise scaling functions certainly exist,
but they generally depend on the specific implementation
of the algorithm, and as a result,
they quickly become quite complicated.
So we'll simply use these ballpark scaling functions here.
Then the fourth column indicates the degree of quantum advantage.
And the last column indicates limitations
as we understand them today.
At the top of the list is quantum simulation
with application to quantum chemistry and material science.
The classical resources scale as 2
to the N-th power for a simulation of N atoms
whereas the quantum resources scale as N to a constant power
C, where C generally ranges from 2 to 6.
Now, by resources, we basically mean
both the time required to reach a solution, referred
to as a temporal resource, and the number of logic or memory
elements needed to implement the problem,
often referred to as a spatial resource.
To quantify the resource requirements,
we quote a mathematical expression for the scaling law.
That is, we're looking at how the resource requirements grow
as the problem gets larger, as parameterized by the size N,
for example, the number of atoms being simulated.
Presumably, as N gets larger, the problem gets harder.
But the question is, how does it get harder?
Does it require exponentially more resources,
such as 2 to the N-th power or a polynomial scaling like N
to an integer power.
For quantum simulation, we see that the classical resources
scale exponentially with N whereas the quantum resources
only scale polynomially.
This means that there's an exponential advantage
to using a quantum computer.
In fact, to simulate the system dynamics for a time t,
both a classical and a quantum computer
would require a similar number of time steps.
For example, if we want to simulate
the dynamics of a reaction for one second,
we would divide that one second into a similar number
of time slices.
However, the quantum advantage is
that there's an exponential reduction
in the amount of memory needed to perform
the simulation on a quantum computer,
and so the quantum advantage is exponential.
The main limitation is in determining
the mapping of a physical problem
onto the qubits, their couplings,
and the gate operations needed to implement a quantum
simulation.
Next, factoring and related number theoretic algorithms
also have an exponential scaling in the number
of classical resources, going as 2
to the N-th power and the number of digits being processed.
In contrast, the quantum resource requirements scale
polynomially as N to the third power, and so quantum advantage
is again exponential.
The main limitation, or perhaps uncertainty,
is that the best-known classical algorithm has not yet
been proven to be optimal.
So there may still be a more efficient classical algorithm
yet to be discovered.
And if so, then the degree of quantum advantage
might also change.
Sampling solutions to linear systems of equations
is the next algorithm.
In this case, we solve linear algebraic problems of the type
Ax equals b, where A is a matrix, b is a known vector,
and x is an unknown vector.
The classical resources scale exponentially as 2
to the N-th power whereas the quantum resources scale
only approximately as N, and so this algorithm also
exhibits exponential advantage.
The main limitation is related to a variety of restrictions
on the operating conditions, for example, a requirement
for a sparse matrix A.
The classical resources required for optimization problems also
scale exponentially as 2 to the N-th power, where N is again
related to the size of the problem.
However, in this case, the corresponding quantum resources
and also the quantum advantage are not well defined.
This is in part because one generally cannot determine
if the resulting answer is indeed optimal.
We can only tell if it's better than a solution we've had
previously.
Thus, we can only derive empirical evidence
that a quantum optimization algorithm provides quantum
advantage, and this is currently the main limitation
of this algorithm.
Finally, there's Grover's search algorithm
for unsorted or unstructured data.
Here, the classical resources scale
with the number of data elements N whereas the quantum resources
go as the square root of N. Thus,
the quantum advantage is square root
of N, a polynomial enhancement.
The main limitation to this type of search algorithm
is the data loading problem, namely,
how can we efficiently load in a large amount
of unsorted or unstructured data that needs to be searched.
In general, we can see that for many, if not all
of these algorithms, there can be a substantial quantum
advantage when the problem size N becomes large.
And for those with an exponential advantage,
classical computers and a Moore's law-like scaling
will never be able to catch the performance of a quantum
computer.
