STEFAN NATU: Now, at AWS, in 2019, we
made the decision to launch a quantum computing program based
on the industry consensus at the time
that near-term quantum devices, or NISQ devices,
may provide commercial value.
We launched our quantum computing strategy
with two major threads.
The first is a focus on building our own hardware.
And that's a long-range effort that's
focused on error correction.
And the second is a cloud service
to provide customers access to near-term quantum
hardware from third-party quantum hardware providers.
And that's called Amazon Braket.
Now, the goals of Braket are to engage customers early
and prepare customers for the arrival
of these fault-tolerant quantum machines.
In the long run, we will be hosting quantum computers
in our data centers and give customers
access to quantum computing resources
alongside on-demand elastic and scalable
CPUs and GPUs via the cloud.
Over the past four years since we launched Braket,
thousands of customers have executed
many billions of circuits on real quantum computers.
So you might be wondering, what have we
learned from all these experiments?
Today I want to tell you about four key learnings.
The first one is that it's too early to call winners.
Now, in this course, you have no doubt
learned about the different modalities of quantum computing.
It is too early to predict today which of these modalities
is ultimately going to deliver advantage
for commercially relevant problems
over existing classical techniques.
Each of these devices have unique characteristics
that make them suitable for certain workloads.
For instance, superconductors are fast,
whereas trapped ions have all-to-all connectivity.
And that's why our strategy at AWS
is to reduce technology risk by providing access
to a diverse range of hardware devices.
Similarly, today, when customers try
to experiment with different hardware,
they're often required to learn the software stack
of the providers separately.
This slows down innovation and experimentation.
And so on Braket, you can experiment
on multiple machines with as few lines of code change
as possible.
The second learning is that disruptive technologies
demand incremental innovation.
When fault-tolerant quantum computers arrive,
everyone's expecting a sort of ChatGPT moment
when the industry is just going to take off.
But the reality is that innovation is incremental.
The first experiments on using neural nets
for large-scale image recognition tasks
occurred in 2012, and OpenAI released ChatGPT in 2022.
So from 2012 to 2022, tens of thousands of developers
were building novel neural net architectures
and training and iterating ML algorithms
that have made today's GenAI innovation possible.
And we see a similar trajectory for quantum.
Application development needs to happen hand in hand
with hardware technology improvements,
as developers need to build the software
stack and the tools that are needed to enable
those end-user applications.
What this means is that there's opportunities for you
to innovate up and down the stack,
get a firsthand sense of the state of play of the industry,
and determine what the potential applications that might
be disrupted by quantum and what are the limitations of today's
devices that need to be overcome before they become useful.
It's essential to get started with exploring
the nuances of the hardware and the software stack
that's needed to program these quantum computers.
As the hardware improves, what they are capable of
is going to change.
And you all have the opportunity to be that change agent.
So today, you can go and get a digital badge
by taking a free online training course on quantum on AWS.
Once you do that, you can go ahead and apply for an AWS Cloud
Credits for Research grant to get
going with using quantum hardware on AWS.
The third learning that I want to talk about
is that quantum is not going to develop in a vacuum.
Just like a GPU today works in tandem with CPUs,
a QPU, or a Quantum Processing Unit,
will work in tandem with many GPUs and CPUs
to run industry-relevant applications,
whether those are material science simulations
or optimization problems and so on.
And it's highly likely that the earliest applications of quantum
computing may require large amounts of classical code
processing power.
So it's super important that when
you're selecting a platform to experiment on,
to ensure that you think about this holistic picture and not
just think about the QPU itself.
At AWS, that was a question we debated for a very long time.
Should we launch Braket as a standalone service outside
of AWS, or should we make it an integral part of the AWS
platform?
We decided to go with the latter.
Because when quantum computers are
working as an integral component in a hybrid HPC infrastructure,
customers that are running those business-critical applications
will care about the security, the networking infrastructure,
the encryption of their data at rest and in transit,
and ensuring that the proper permissions and guardrails exist
around who accesses that data and ensuring that their quantum
infrastructure provider is compliant
with the various compliance attestations
that they need to meet.
So you can say that in some sense,
our goal is to make quantum as boring as possible,
meaning that you can just focus on building that end
application.
Our fourth learning is that ecosystems
play an essential role.
On EC2 today, which is our compute service in the cloud,s
we offer customers a choice of hardware, from Intel, AMD,
NVIDIA, and our own.
And we envision the same to happen in quantum computing.
So our role is to enable you to push the innovation forward,
break down those barriers for you to do so,
and cultivate the ecosystem.
Today, there are dozens of quantum software partners
who are building middleware technologies, such as error
mitigation, and exploring early applications with enterprise
customers.
We actively encourage these partners
to build on top of our service.
They have application-specific expertise
that enables them to understand the potential benefits
and pitfalls of quantum computers
for use cases that are relevant to industry.
Today, the most prominent use cases for quantum
are in materials science, chemistry,
such as molecular simulation, financial services,
such as portfolio optimization, logistics, and machine learning.
Some of these are more near term than others,
but they are being actively explored
by many of the partners who are on our ecosystem.
So what can you do?
Like I said, this is all about experimentation.
It's about moving the ball forward
with incremental improvements and keeping a close eye
on the state of the art.
We firmly believe at AWS that quantum will one day
solve problems that are forever out of reach
of classical computers.
And I'm excited to be a part of that journey.
