ELICA KYOSEVA: It is a pleasure to be here today
and to tell you how NVIDIA is pioneering
the future of quantum computing with AI supercomputing.
To start, I would like to clarify one thing.
NVIDIA is not building a quantum computer or any other type
of quantum hardware.
What NVIDIA is doing is building all accelerated quantum
supercomputers.
The way that this will work is that NVIDIA supercomputers
will integrate quantum computers as co-processors.
These quantum computers can have different qubit modalities
and be manufactured by different QPU providers.
NVIDIA's solution is actually de-risking the quantum industry
by being hardware agnostic because for us, it
doesn't matter who produces the quantum computer.
We work with everyone to integrate their solutions
with our quantum supercomputers.
So what are the challenges that quantum computing is facing?
All applications will be running part
of their workload on a classical supercomputers,
and only part of the problem will be
solved on quantum algorithms.
So we need better hybrid algorithms.
We need also better developer tools,
and we need workforce development
in order to lower the barrier of entry
to domain experts that need to integrate quantum
computing as part of their workloads
at the moment of solving industry applications.
We need also better error correction codes
and also implementing quantum error correction
that requires very low latency between the quantum hardware
and the classical hardware.
And we also need infrastructure enabling
the tight integration between QPUs
and classical supercomputers.
And NVIDIA's GPUs are able to solve all of those problems.
GPUs will be used for quantum computing
research and development.
These include application development, circuit design,
dynamical simulations of quantum hardware,
which will enable better construction and better hardware
design.
GPUs will be used also for running quantum computers,
and their role will be in the readout in the calibration
of quantum computers, in fixing and decoding
errors that are detected during the operations of that quantum
computers in modularity where we need to couple tightly
quantum computers with classical supercomputers
and also in scheduling the power consumption of quantum
computers.
Hybrid applications will be using GPUs and QPUs and NVIDIA's
CUDA-Q programming framework allows for seamless applications
programming, where what is needed to be run on the QPU
is seamlessly programmed there while the rest is run
on a classical supercomputer.
CUDA-Q is designed to be used by QPU vendors,
by enterprises, by academics, and by anyone else that
would like to learn how to program the quantum
supercomputers of the future.
CUDA-Q includes libraries, programming model, tools,
and infrastructure.
What we could use CUDA-Q for is simulation
where the back end of CUDA-Q uses cuquantum,
which is an accelerated simulation library of quantum
computers which can provide state vector and tensor network
simulations, and also we can use CUDA-Q to program
actual quantum hardware.
CUDA-Q is already very highly adopted in the industry,
and we already have over 150 quantum partners.
Over 90% of the largest quantum computing startups use CUDA-Q,
and over 75% of QPUs are integrating NVIDIA software.
15 out of the 17 largest quantum computing
frameworks are accelerated with CUDA-Q. NVIDIA quantum
and CUDA-Q are open source, and we work
with everyone in the industry.
We work with quantum hardware providers, with cloud service
providers, with research centers around the world,
with quantum software providers, systems builders, and also
quantum simulation frameworks.
Quantum computing is supposed to have a broad impact
across many industries.
These include chemistry, drug discovery and pharmaceuticals,
logistics, finance, physics, modeling materials,
nitrogen fixation, and AI and machine learning.
All of these have in common very hard computational problems
for which we have proved that quantum algorithms will
be able to provide a solution that
is not possible to be obtained with classical methods.
For example, I would like to highlight a recent supercomputer
based on NVIDIA's GPUs called Gefion, which was purchased
by the Novo Nordisk Foundation to do research
in quantum computing for health applications
and to use the latest AI supercomputing
approaches to solve these problems.
We believe that accelerating everyone's solutions
is what is required in order to enable the future quantum
computing revolution and to realize the quantum
supercomputers of the future.
