
So what is complexity theory?
Theoretical computer scientists love to come up
with complexity classes.
So P is polynomial time computation.
NP, things you can prove in polynomial time.
So who here doesn't really know about NP?
OK, so let's explain NP a little bit.
The most famous NP complete problem
may be the traveling salesman problem.
And here you have a graph, distances
between, let's call them, cities, which are really
the nodes of the graph.
And the question, is there a path visiting all cities
less than length l?

So this might be 1, 2, 3, 5--
or no 2, 3, 1, 1, 2, 3.
So this would be a path of length 12.
And of course, there are distances--
I mean there are roads between the cities I haven't put on
here at distances along those roads,
if these were the only roads, it would be an easy problem.
And in fact, if there's only six vertices, it's an easy problem.
So it's easy to prove yes.
So if I want to prove that there's a path,
I just give you the path, and you
add up the distances along it and check it.
And I can prove it.
But it's hard-- or may be hard to prove no.
So how can I prove that there is no path shorter
than distance 12 on that route?
Well, I could run through all paths
and check all their distances but that
takes a very long time.

And if I know and if I were trying to convince you
that I've done this, would there be a better way
to convince you other than just say, well, I
ran through all the paths and checked them?
And actually, for the traveling salesman problem
there are better ways but they all
seem to be exponential time in the worst case.
Or exponential time in the number of cities.
And now there are problems that are NP-Complete,
which are as hard as any NP problem.
In other words, if I could solve an NP-Complete problem
in polynomial time in the length of its input,
I could solve any problem in NP in polynomial time
the length of its input.

And you do that by reducing one problem to another.
And at some point in the 1990s, I think,
computer scientists came up with interactive proofs.
And there are three classes of interactive proofs.
IP, no bound on the number of rounds,
AM, and here “A” stands for Arthur and “M” stands for Merlin.
And Merlin has infinite computing power
and Arthur really only has polynomial amount
of computing power.
So A sends M message, M returns message.
So that's two rounds.

And then there's also MA.

M gives A proof.
A verifies it with coin flips.
So NP, Merlin gives Arthur a proof and Arthur
verifies it deterministically.
MA, Merlin gives Arthur a proof and Arthur verifies it,
but probabilistically.
And AM, Arthur sends Merlin a message,
and Merlin returns a message.
And the classic example of AM is graph non-isomorphism.
Are these two graphs isomorphic, and NP.
so we're given two graphs and I guess these have 5, 6, 1, 2, 3,
4, 5, 6.

So the question is, is there a way to relabel the vertices
so that they are the same?
And the guess answer is an NP, isomorphism is in NP.
Merlin just gives Arthur a relabelling.
So Merlin says 1 in this graph corresponds to 5 in this graph.
3 in this graph corresponds to 4 in this graph, et cetera.

OK.
And non-isomorphism is an AM.

Arthur takes one of the graphs.
He re-numbers the vertices at random
and he sends it to Merlin.
And Merlin is supposed to--
Merlin says which graph it is.
Now, if the two graphs are isomorphic,
you know, Merlin has the scrambled graph
but a random scrambling of this graph
looks exactly like a random scrambling of this graph.
So he can't tell them apart.
And if the two graphs are not isomorphic,
then if Merlin has an infinitely powerful computer,
he can try all possible permutations
and tell them apart.
So that says that non-isomorphism
is an Arthur-Merlin.
