BEN BLOOM: We're building quantum computers
using arrays of neutral atoms.
We do this because we believe the technology is scalable
and can reach a level that actually accesses utility scale
problems.
One of the amazing things about neutral atoms
is how it's actually built off of technology
that already exists.
What we do is we take qubits and we use classical hardware,
and that classical hardware is almost
like projection equipment.
So we build this projection equipment
that we can control really, really quickly and actually
manipulate these atoms at the atomic level
so that we can actually control their state,
entangle them, and perform those calculations.
REMY NOTERMANS: In order to build a fault tolerant quantum
computer, we need the performance of qubits
to be many orders of magnitude better than what it currently is
or what's even achievable with the qubits themselves.
So in order to do that, we actually group multiple
physical qubits, in our case neutral atoms,
together and create a so-called logical qubit that
has much better performance than any of the individual
qubits themselves.
For most applications that people are talking about,
you need hundreds and thousands if not more logical qubits
to run these fault tolerant applications.
So one of the big advantages of our technology
is that through a clever optical engineering,
we can really scale the number of physical qubits
extremely aggressively, where you can really
enter the era of scientific and economic advantage
for running quantum computers.
BEN BLOOM: One of the things we're really focused on
is making sure that we can get to utility scale.
So at every step of the way, we want
to make sure when we build systems,
we're increasing the amount of qubits
we have tenfold every single generation so
that we can get to utility scale as fast as possible.
KRISTEN PUDENZ: Not only are we pushing for system scale,
we're pushing for usable systems,
and that means that we need to be
able to run long computations, get meaningful results from them
and be able to use those results to inform the science
problem or the industry problem that began the question.
So we look at all of these things,
and we believe that our systems will be very
capable of making an impact.
JUSTIN GING: Doing optimization problems, simulation,
or acceleration of machine learning,
almost every industry has some way that they could
benefit from quantum computing.
We are working together with the National Renewable Energy
Lab located in Golden, Colorado, and they
have a digital twin of the energy grid modeling
out everything that goes into it.
And as much as possible, they like
to automate how to handle different situations.
So with this digital twin, they have found certain applications
where quantum can work in a more effective way than classical.
Another area where we've partnered
is with the University of Colorado Anschutz Medical
Campus, where they're looking at things like can we use quantum
to help in the machine learning process of identifying disease,
particularly in the ophthalmology,
looking at diseases of the eye.
And we're also working with a large international bank,
looking at portfolio optimization and pricing
of exotic options and using quantum
as a tool in the finance field.
KRISTEN PUDENZ: Quantum chemistry applications
are excellent candidates for running smoothly
on quantum computers.
We think about things like nitrogen fixation.
This is a process that provides the fertilizer that we
use to feed the world or catalysis that
makes all kinds of processes more energy efficient and able
to produce scarce materials more easily.
Huge potential for optimization problems
like the traveling salesman problem
when package delivery services come
and try to bring things to your house and your neighbors.
How do they do that the most efficiently?
If we can provide even small margins and savings
on the routes that those vehicles follow,
we should be able to provide a large degree
of industrial value.
JUSTIN GING: There will probably be organizations
that find a particular application that's
crucial to their business, and they'll
implement quantum resources to on a day-to-day basis
be constantly churning out particular types
of applications.
Maybe a bank that needs to reprice a portfolio just
on a rolling basis can now do so faster,
more efficiently change their business processes.
REMY NOTERMANS: In the long term,
quantum computing will be integrated
as some hybrid compute resource together
with supercompute centers or other HPC centers
and really provide a background black box hybrid computing
resource that a lot of people will be using without really
realizing which part of the application that they're trying
to run is actually being run on a quantum
computer versus another cloud resource.
KRISTEN PUDENZ: We engineer our roadmap and the system
generations therein to not only represent achievable advances
in technology but to address application projects that
have real impact and real meaning to society.
BEN BLOOM: We're really going to start
trying to answer the questions that the customers are really
asking.
They're not just asking can I run this simple algorithm.
They're asking can I build this new material.
And that's where we really want to go as a company,
pushing towards actually giving solutions, not just giving
answers to algorithms.
