
JERRY CHOW: Computers are everywhere and in everything.
They touch every aspect of our lives.
And there doesn't seem to be a limit to their power.
But the truth is, there are some very hard problems
that even our most powerful classical supercomputers
will never be able to solve.
We believe that quantum computers
will be able to start tackling some
of these problems in a few short years.
Here's an example.
Today, improving battery technology
is incredibly time and labor intensive.
Researchers believe that quantum computers will soon
be able to run much more powerful chemistry
simulations, which we hope can be used to radically improve
battery efficiency.
Imagine an electric car that only needs to be charged once
a month, not once a week, not once every few days,
or machine learning.
A 2023 Nielsen report found that credit card fraud
cost the financial industry $33 billion globally.
Quantum machine learning algorithms
could extend our ability to perform
the higher-dimensional data processing that
would allow us to improve fraud detection by reducing
false positives, which are very costly.
Right now there isn't a quantum computer
on the planet that can beat all classical methods
at these kinds of problems.
But we think that's about to change.
Looking ahead, our work is really
focused on building the devices and software
tools that let us run larger and larger circuits that
are comprised of more qubits and more logical gates.
In 2016, IBM became the first organization
to take quantum computers out of the research lab
and put them in the cloud.
The first offering provided free access to a 5-qubit IBM quantum
Canary processor for anyone with an internet connection.
Now, less than a decade later, in 2023,
an IBM experiment showed that exact classical methods could
not simulate a circuit comprising just over 100 qubits
and just under 3,000 gates.
Classical computers can only approximate that level
of complexity.
So how do we make this journey from 5-qubit processors
to the 100-plus-qubit processors of today?
Well, back in 2016, we had no guarantee that we'd ever cross
the 100-qubit threshold.
But we knew that if we wanted to get there,
we'd have to make a lot of progress
on three key metrics, scale, quality, and speed.
Scale is the number of qubits in our processors
and in the quantum chips that we run.
Now, quality is determined by the error rates
that we see in our quantum logic gates and that act
on two qubits at once.
These underlying 2-qubit gates have an enormous impact
on performance across a large quantum device.
This quality actually determines the size of the quantum circuits
that we can execute faithfully.
Now, speed has to do with the number of circuits
that a quantum computer can run per unit of time.
Fastest circuit runs gives us more space to handle errors
and makes it more practical for researchers
to actually incorporate quantum into their workflows.
In addition to improving the scale, quality,
and speed of our systems, we also
knew that we would need to begin working on new quantum
algorithms to make the best use of our evolving systems.
This is a big job.
And we've enlisted the help of the entire quantum community.
But there's still a lot of work to do.
At IBM, we've built a tool to help
us think about what comes next.
We call it the IBM Quantum Roadmap.
The IBM Quantum Development Roadmap map
shows how our systems will grow in terms of qubit count
and the size of the quantum circuits they can run,
which we measure by the number of gates
that we can execute accurately.
Here you can see where we started, with the launch
of the IBM Quantum Experience.
You can see some of the small systems that
were available during those first few years,
like the Canary and the Albatross.
In 2021, we crossed the 100-qubit barrier with Eagle.
And then in 2023, we broke the 1,000-qubit barrier with Condor.
From 2023 to 2024, we also debuted two versions
of the IBM quantum Herron chip.
Now, Herron doesn't have as many qubits as Condor,
but it's the first to be capable of returning accurate results
on a quantum circuit all the way out to 5,000-qubic gates,
an important milestone.
And it demonstrates a significant improvement
in the underlying quality through using
a novel tunable coupler architecture.
Then we have the IBM quantum flamingo,
which are largely based on modularity scalability
of quantum processors.
It's actually made up of two Herron chips joined together
by four connectors, which we call L couplers.
We're going to continue to iterate on Flamingo, improving
its underlying performance.
From there, we'll introduce Starling in 2029
and then Blue Jay in 2033.
These systems open up a whole new world of potential quantum
applications because they'll be our first quantum
processors to actually demonstrate full quantum error
correction.
Quantum processors create incredibly delicate quantum
states that are really susceptible to errors
that can be caused by noise in the environment.
Today, we have error handling methods such as quantum error
mitigation, to extract useful data from noisy outputs.
But true quantum error correction
will be much more powerful.
By using error correction codes, where
we encode qubit information into a larger set of qubits,
we expect that we'll be able to suppress logically-encoded error
rates to significantly lower levels.
Now, in 2023, our quantum error correction theory team
devised a highly efficient and effective new code,
beating other leading approaches by an order of magnitude
in terms of needed physical resources.
This led us to mark our targets in our roadmap for Starlink
and Blue Jay to achieve 200 qubits and 100 million gates
by 2029 and 2,000 qubits and 1 billion gates by 2033.
But quantum computing is about more than just hardware.
2017 we launched the Qiskit SDK, our open-source software
development kit.
In those early years, execution for quantum computers was slow.
So in 2021, we introduced Qiskit Runtime, a cloud-enabled runtime
environment to enable more efficient workloads
with higher throughput.
In 2024, we introduced Qiskit Code Assistant and the Qiskit
Functions Catalog.
The code assistant helps developers quickly generate
high quality quantum code, while the functions catalog gives us
a collection of pre-built services
that allow users to abstract away parts of the quantum
software development workflow.
We plan to continue growing the collection of services
available in the Qiskit Functions Catalog.
We launched scalable circuit knitting.
Circuit knitting is a technique that breaks down one quantum
circuit into multiple smaller circuits
and then runs them in parallel on multiple quantum processors.
And this will all be put together
in a new paradigm, which we call quantum centric supercomputing,
where we leverage high-performance classical
computing systems, to help partition and also reconstruct
larger quantum circuits.
This all sets the stage for us to succeed
in building Starlink and Blue Jay in the later years.
Now, despite the achievements of the past few years,
we haven't yet found a problem that quantum computers can solve
cheaper, faster, or more accurately
beyond all classical approximation methods.
And this is a milestone that we call quantum advantage.
So why are enterprise research organizations, government
agencies, and academic institutions all investing
in working with IBM quantum today?
Well, by 2035, McKinsey & Company
predicts that quantum computing technology
will create as much as $2 trillion in value.
And a report by Boston Consulting Group
indicates that as much as 90% of that value
will go to the early adopters.
That's why research organizations are starting now.
There's a steep learning curve.
So an early start on learning and experimentation
can provide a substantial competitive advantage.
Organizations work with quantum service providers,
like IBM, not only to gain access to our systems,
but also to gain access to our technical and managerial
expertise.
All of our clients and partners are helping us as well.
When quantum advantage is first achieved on our system,
it will likely not be done by our own researchers,
but more likely by domain experts
at one of those partner organizations.
We couldn't possibly dream up every experiment
that's worth trying.
We need our wider quantum research community
to help us explore the potential of large-scale quantum computers
from all these different angles.
And it's why a big part of what we offer
is also open access to our systems.
It's why we've built the Qiskit software development
kit as an open-source tool that anyone can use for free.
We want to ensure that these resources are
accessible to anyone in the quantum community.
And we all have to work together to pursue quantum advantage.
