YONATAN COHEN: There was a time when
using machines to perform complex calculations
was a revolutionary idea.
Fast forward to today, controlling billions
of classical bits has become second nature, integrated
into every processor and computer,
affecting every bit of our life.
But now, with the emerging technology of quantum computing,
we're basically back to square one.
Quantum bits, or qubits, which are the quantum
counterparts of classical bits, are a whole new challenge.
They're delicate, they're error prone,
yet they're capable of astonishing computational power.
However, we live in the classical world,
so none of this quantum computation
would be possible without creating an interface that
transforms classical information to quantum operations and vice
versa.
And this is precisely the role of the quantum control system.
It's a set of tools that interact with quantum objects
and make information processing benefit from the wonders
of quantum mechanics.
To appreciate the crucial role of quantum control,
let's briefly examine the quantum computing stack.
At the foundation level, we have the quantum processing unit,
the QPU.
This is where the qubits reside.
Above this in the stack, we find the control and readout systems,
which manipulate and measure the qubits.
They do this by sending and receiving
a sequence of very accurate electromagnetic signals.
Next, we have the control software and firmware
translating high-level instructions
into qubit operations at the control pulses level.
At the top of the stack, we have, of course, the application
layer, where quantum algorithms are developed and run.
So quantum control, our focus today,
acts as the critical bridge between the classical and
quantum worlds.
It translates abstract quantum algorithms
into the precise physical operations
that manipulate the qubits.
MICHAELA EICHINGER: Controlling qubits is incredibly delicate,
like writing on a soap bubble without popping it.
To ensure qubits operate correctly,
we must generate precise and carefully timed
electromagnetic pulses.
Even the tiniest error in these pulses
can cause the qubit to end up in the wrong state,
derailing the entire computation.
Our control system is like the orchestra playing
music to the qubits, which dance in response.
Each pulse is a musical note, carefully composed
to guide the qubits' movements.
So how do we manage this composition?
A quantum controller acts like the conductor
of this intricate quantum orchestra.
It's a classical processing machine
responsible for generating and managing the control
signals that make qubits dance.
Key functions of such a controller are--
it generates precise pulses to manipulate qubits,
it reads out qubit states after operations,
it synchronizes all quantum operations,
it processes data and performs calculations in real time,
and it makes split second decisions,
adapting the control flow as needed.
YONATAN COHEN: At quantum machines,
we've pioneered a new approach to quantum control
with our pulse processing unit, the PPU.
So traditional systems, memory-based systems,
are like pre-recorded music.
They're limited to fixed sequences that take very long
to communicate with the control system,
and also cannot respond to what's happening in the quantum
processor in real time.
We moved from memory-based control system
to a processor-based one.
Our pulse processing unit, it's kind of like a live conductor
capable of making real-time decisions and corrections
on the fly.
This is crucial if you want your quantum program
to really respond to what's actually
happening with your qubits.
Moreover, we embedded classical compute engines inside our pulse
processing unit.
So now you can interleave quantum and classical operations
in the same code and then run them from the same hardware.
As the field progresses, the realization
that every quantum program is actually
a hybrid quantum classical program
strengthens and strengthens.
And so such tight integration between quantum and classical
becomes crucial.
This technology powers our OPX system, a comprehensive control
and measurement solution for quantum processors,
which embodies our vision of tight quantum
classical integration.
The PPU's multi-core architecture
allows for parallel signal generation, acquisition,
and processing, enabling the OPX to manage complex quantum tasks
at very high scales with unparalleled speeds
and precision on many, many, many qubits.
MICHAELA EICHINGER: Calibration is
one of the biggest challenges in quantum computing.
Consider the 2 qubit gate, a fundamental operation
in quantum computing.
In traditional systems, this can take a long time to calibrate,
and this calibration process has to be repeated for many qubits,
ending up in a process that takes hours.
Our OPX system can perform embedded calibration protocols
that significantly reduce this time.
We've seen QPU calibrations reduce from 8 hours
to just 30 minutes, and we expect
this to be reduced further to a matter of seconds.
Beyond calibration, quantum error correction
is crucial for enabling longer, more complex quantum
computations.
Yet the sheer amount of data processing
required for this is staggering.
To meet this challenge, we've partnered with NVIDIA.
We're combining our pulse processing units
real-time capabilities with GPU parallel processing connected
by an ultra low-latency interface.
This integrated system tackles the intense computational
demands of large-scale quantum error correction,
and with this, leads the way for powerful quantum
computers and a seamless quantum classical interface.
YONATAN COHEN: As we look to the future,
the challenges lie in scaling up quantum systems
from tens and hundreds of qubits to thousands
and tens of thousands of qubits, and beyond.
Our technology is designed with this future in mind,
providing the flexible and powerful control
necessary to manage such large-scale quantum systems.
The impact of our work goes beyond scaling.
We're opening new possibilities for
efficient hybrid quantum classical algorithms
and workflows.
This tight integration creates the fluid interface
between two powerful and complementary platforms--
the quantum processing unit, the QPU,
and the classical computing layer,
which is really the entire data center, boosting performance
to an uncharted and exciting regime.
In conclusion, at Quantum Machines,
we're building more than just control systems.
We're creating the vital link that
will allow quantum computers to reach their full potential.
Our technology is at the forefront
of bridging the gap between classical and quantum computing,
driving the next generation of computational breakthroughs.
