
JACK HIDARY: Hi, my name is Jack Hidary.
I'm Founder and CEO of SandboxAQ.
When I was recruited to Alphabet about seven years ago, what
we realized is that advanced compute was good not just
for solving search, but we can now
train our eyes on so many of the large problems in the world.
With our growing success, we realized
that we can have deep impact at scale, deep impact in areas
such as health care and drug development,
hitting major diseases; deep impact in the energy
sector, automotive and aerospace;
deep impact in navigating without GPS, which
is a critical issue in the world today;
deep impact in cybersecurity, protecting the world's data
from the threats of both AI and quantum.
We realized that both AI and quantum
would be two critical tools in solving these challenges.
When we think about AI, we can go beyond just large language
models into new models that are actually quantitative in nature.
This takes us beyond the kind of GPTs
that you see out there to large quantitative models,
LQMs, models that understand physics and chemistry
and biology.
These models are very, very different
than the models you see out there on the internet,
but they're really the right tools
to use to develop new treatments for diseases like Parkinson's
and Alzheimer's and cancer.
They're the right tools to think about new battery chemistry
to store energy.
They're the right tools for the new materials
we need to solve key issues in our world.
And so when we started developing these kinds of tools,
we started getting more and more success.
We realized that we can work on real pharmaceutically relevant
molecules.
We can start to work on materials
that would affect and impact the automotive area,
the aerospace area, and other key industries.
And so we decided to spin out the company
as an independent company to grow faster and further.
So how does SandboxAQ accomplish these key goals?
How do we impact drug discovery and development?
How do we impact energy storage and generation?
How do we impact material science
for so many critical industries?
Well, it starts with understanding the need
to combine AI with physics.
Our world is governed by physics.
And we need to train AI in that physics
if we want to impact that world.
I'm sure you've all heard about large language models
and tried some of those online.
We have that here on the slide in the green--
AI for language and graphics and videos,
a lot of interesting use cases there, such as marketing copy,
interactive customer service applications, software coding.
It definitely helps with that.
But when it comes to the real world, when
it comes to the physical world, when
it comes to quantitative finance,
we need a different kind of AI, an AI that's
combined with quantum physics and other key tool sets
to understand how to make stuff for that world,
and also to optimize portfolios and other applications.
As you see on the slide, the largest sectors of our economy--
the largest sectors, including financial services, biopharma,
auto and aerospace, chemicals, energy and materials,
these are the ones where there's some application for language
models.
But really, what we need are quantitative models, models that
understand the equations of quantum physics,
models that understand the equations that
govern so many key areas and sectors of our society.
These are the models that SandboxAQ focuses on.
We are the global pacesetter in these areas
and develop models now for each of the sectors
that you see on the slide.
So what does the future of computing look like?
As you see on this slide, it looks
like a combination, a mesh, of both the work
that we do today on GPUs, from NVIDIA and many other companies,
as well as the interaction with QPUs, quantum processing units.
In this course, you've heard about different ways
of building quantum computers and using quantum computers.
But they will exist in a mesh in a hybridized format
with the classical computing of today.
There's a role for both of these as we move forward,
and much of that will be in the cloud.
Quantum computing is one of the first innovations that
is cloud-native, born in the cloud.
99% of how people interact with quantum computers
today and tomorrow will be via the cloud.
And those same clouds is where we host
most of the GPUs of the world.
And so when you write a program that
is meant to look at drug discovery, part of that program
will run on the GPUs, and part of that code
will run on the QPUs.
They'll be integrated into one mesh, resulting in a solution
that neither alone could produce.
Let's look at an example in practice.
On the screen now, you're looking
at a molecular interaction.
The small molecule in purple is going
through thousands, perhaps millions, of permutations
to fit into a larger molecule, in this case, a protein.
This is very typical of the kind of work we do in drug chemistry.
And these interactions are molecular in nature
and therefore quantum in nature.
This is the kind of work that is accelerating drug chemistry
by many, many years and providing leapfrog innovation
in this particular sector.
Let's now look at another sector, navigation.
What happens in navigation when you don't have GPS?
We all rely upon GPS in our phones
and our cars and, of course, planes also rely upon GPS.
But what if GPS is jammed?
What if it's spoofed?
And that's happening right now.
Russia is jamming GPS over much of Europe.
China's jamming GPS over much of the Pacific area,
particularly over Taiwan.
And Iran is jamming GPS in the Middle East.
What if you have to navigate in these areas?
Well, it turns out you can navigate.
And the inspiration, of course, comes from the animal kingdom.
Birds and whales and many other animals
have the ability to navigate via the magnetic field of the Earth.
And now, thanks to this innovation, humans do as well,
this innovation where we're applying quantitative AI
to look at the magnetic field of the Earth.
We're using quantum-based sensors
to pick up the small changes from one area of the Earth
to the next, similar to our fingerprints,
unique every single different spot.
And we're using this MagNav, magnetic navigation,
to help that plane navigate even when there's no GPS.
So this is another example where AI and quantum interact
to provide a new solution that was not possible before.
And so these two case studies, both in drug chemistry
and in AQNav, provide examples of the leapfrog innovation
that happens when you bring AI and quantum together.
Thank you.
