
ERIC HOLLAND: Welcome.
I'm Dr. Eric Holland, the General Manager
for Keysight's quantum engineering solutions group.
You may not be familiar with Keysight,
but likely you are with the company we spun out from,
Hewlett-Packard.
More than 80 years ago, Bill and Dave
used their engineering skills to design a product that
would help our first customer and Walt Disney Studios
not only record Fantasia in stereo sound,
but also be the first movie studio ever
to roll out stereo sound nationwide in movie theaters.
At Keysight, we are not building our own quantum computer,
and we haven't married ourselves to any one quantum technology.
The core of our company is design, test, and validation.
So by circumstance, our capabilities naturally
gravitated towards manufactured quantum technologies
such as superconducting qubits, spin qubits, quantum dots,
or photonic quantum processors.
So how do we fit in?
On the design side, we have software tools
to lay out and simulate the performance of quantum
processors and quantum limited amplifiers.
For test, we provide room temperature and cryogenic wafer
test and probing tools that are popular with foundries
and semiconductor organizations.
We also have network analysis tools
to understand cryogenic calibration and anomalous two
level systems.
On the validation side, we provide a wide array
of telecom products that are attractive to photonic quantum
processors, such as lasers and optical power attenuators,
while for superconducting and spin qubits,
we provide the quantum to classical interface,
the room temperature control electronics,
and quantum operating system.
We are agnostic on the first quantum computing
application for business.
Honestly, we're rooting across the board for quantum advantage,
because when the field wins, we win.
We do not expect to be the ones with the idea
for some novel algorithmic implementation that massively
changes how material design is approached in HPC.
Our goal is to provide the tools so that scientists and engineers
can focus on pursuing quantum advantage.
All quantum technologies have major hurdles
that they must overcome to implement a fault tolerant
quantum computer.
We believe that across the board,
the major challenges that must be addressed
are first, performance.
High fidelity single and multi qubit gates,
as well as develop robust real time protocols
to navigate noise.
Second, speed.
The wall clock time of the quantum computer
must be fast enough to address change
the world applications on timescales
relevant to industry applications.
The algorithm execution timescales cannot take decades,
centuries, nor millennia.
Third, scale.
A quantum computer implementing change the world applications
likely will have hundreds of thousands or millions
of physical qubits.
Great advancements in manufacturing
at scale for quantum processors must
be made across the entire supply chain, as well
as the miniaturization of key components
from a system design perspective so that the quantum computer is
of a manageable size as well as easy
to maintain for high uptime.
This is essentially swap C for quantum computing.
We hope that by and large, quantum computers
contribute to the good of humanity
as well as substantially advance our scientific knowledge.
We intend to contribute to the democratization of quantum
computing by providing software tools such as device design
simulation, as well as consistently improving
the quantum to classical interfaces
to foster a global community of quantum innovation.
Our hope is that by lowering the bar
to innovation, everyone benefits, not just a select few.
To date, the major vertical industries
integrating our quantum computing tools
are in the advanced computing domain.
Whether they are hyperscalers, high performance computing,
or systems integrators for end customers
such as national laboratories or general government.
We also support university efforts,
but their aim is typically different.
Either they are focused on the fundamental primitives
of the three major technological hurdles
and/or workforce development for the next generation
of scientists and engineers.
In addition, we have other aspects
we would like to include, which you might want to contribute to,
including quantum to classical interface,
classical electronics that control quantum computers,
software stack.
The quantum to classical interface
is where the rubber meets the road
in quantum computing, and all the engineering implementation
details matter.
The entire quantum to classical system
must enact the faithful and reliable execution
of quantum circuits, which are compiled down
into instruction sets for the underlying physical hardware.
Each quantum technology has its own unique requirements
for the quantum to classical interface.
Also, in every quantum to classical converter,
there are FPGAs that provide real time digital signal
processing on the output, input, or both.
Finally, the way in which all of this instrumentation in FPGA IP
is orchestrated together to enact quantum operations
is specific to the underlying quantum technology
it is interfacing with.
The quantum to classical interface
is a fantastic systems integration and systems design
problem for the coming decades.
If you look at the history of high performance computing,
the decades of the '70s, '80s, and '90s were dominated by major
architectural paradigms that enabled the next breakthrough.
We have made great progress in the last five years
on the quantum to classical interface,
but it is still very much in its early infancy.
No one at present has developed a platform
that can be trivially expanded from a SWOPSI perspective
to serve as the front end to a fault tolerant quantum
computer demonstrating quantum advantage.
As the field progresses forward, I
expect more ASICs to be developed specifically
to facilitate the quantum to classical interface.
My general expectation for the quantum to classical interface
is for it to become a larger engineering effort
over the next 5 to 10 years.
That will facilitate a transition from generalized
to specialized knowledge with cultivated expertise
in this area, and consequently for it
to become a long term career field.
As a quantum leader inside a large company or institution,
it is best to recognize that part of your role
is to provide the vision for how and why quantum fits in.
In one sense, the business challenges
Keysight faced when deciding whether or not
to enter quantum computing are typical of what one might expect
of any well-established company considering entering
into quantum computing.
Few, if any, large companies inherently
have quantum technologies as something
that was core to their company's previous success.
Typical questions and concerns from the executive team as well
as the shareholders are, does this make sense for our company?
Is this something we can make meaningful contributions to?
Why us and not someone else?
What is our moat?
My experience has been that it is best
to acknowledge that quantum computing is still
in its infancy, and that we must make calculated risks based
on our underlying technology assumptions.
My concluding thought here is that before technology arrives,
there is uncertainty on its future success.
Being at a company like Keysight that for 80 years
has been at the forefront of innovation,
we've accumulated a certain amount of risk tolerance
to the idea that the technology may arrive before the market is
ready, but our experience is that innovation rarely
goes to waste.
