DAVID RIVAS: Rigetti is a full-stack quantum computing
company focused on superconducting qubits.
What that means when we say "full stack"
is we build everything that we actually have to build a full
quantum computing system.
That includes the chips.
That includes the hardware that goes inside the dilution
refrigerator.
That includes the control systems.
It includes quite a lot of software
for making the system available to end users.
We spent an awful lot of time both with architecture
and tuning process.
Every little change in almost every component of the system
can begin to make an impact on the performance.
So having a captive fab and doing a lot of this work
ourselves turns out to make a very impactful difference,
both in the kinds of things we can do
and the speed within which we can do them.
Two of the most interesting and important breakthroughs
that we've made relate to packaging.
We were the first to do superconducting qubits with full
3D signaling.
This enabled us to get denser, which helps with scaling,
but it also enabled us to put a lot more control in terms
of the kinds of interactions that we were having
with the underlying qubits.
Similarly, we were the first organization
to ever build out functioning quantum processors
with multiple dies, achieving entanglement
across a processor boundaries, fundamentally a packaging issue.
As we move into an error correction world,
this concentration on packaging, along with underlying processing
and qubit architecture, will become more and more important.
ANDREW BESTWICK: One of the benefits
of having our own fab is that we can have quantum scientists
and fabrication experts as part of the same team,
and there's a frequency and depth of dialogue that can lead
to interesting breakthroughs.
A recent example of this is a breakthrough
we had called alternating bias-assisted annealing.
One of our scientists had a burst of insight
one day about how to reduce the variability of the Josephson
junctions in our chip, which determine
the frequency of the qubits.
He grabbed one of our fab gurus.
He laid out the idea, and this resulted in the ABA process.
That led to a big breakthrough.
We were able to cut down on the amount of spread
in our Josephson junctions, the amount of manufacturing
variability, by almost a factor of 10, which
got our frequencies more precise by almost a factor of 5.
And that led to all kinds of new opportunities
to really precisely engineer the Hamiltonians of our chips.
MIKE PIECH: One of the biggest reasons why organizations
acquire our systems is to carry out
their own experimentation with quantum computing,
and in particular playing with the construction of quantum
computers.
Entities such as national laboratories and supercomputer
centers have initiatives around getting
familiarized with different quantum computing modalities
and what it takes to set up and operate systems
based on those modalities.
There are also some universities that
don't have the fabrication or other large-scale facilities
necessary to make all the quantum hardware from scratch,
but which nevertheless want to expand programs
in quantum computing.
MARCO PAINI: The application development
we see continues to be dominated by use cases that
have been discussed for many years, quantum
simulation, optimization, and machine learning.
Quantum simulation is mostly molecular modeling
or condensed matter related to discovering new drugs
or engineering new materials.
Optimization algorithms are applicable
in a wide range of domains, from logistics to finance.
An area where there continues to be exciting development
is quantum machine learning, for example, quantum feature
mapping in its combination with classical methods such as kernel
methods.
Feature mapping is a transformation
of the input data into a different form
in order to improve the performances
of a downstream learning model.
Quantum feature mapping is the realization of a feature
map with quantum circuits.
An example of the combination is a project
we did with Moody's and Imperial College London.
We used a combination of quantum feature maps and signature
kernels on historic economic data
to train a model that shows promising improvement
in predicting recessions when compared
to classical alternatives.
This work is ongoing and continues
to offer promising benefits.
ANDREW BESTWICK: Most challenges fall
into two categories, fidelity of each
of the operations on the chip and scaling,
how to get as many qubits and operations as possible
into a single system.
The fidelity numbers are determined
by how long the qubits live, what their coherence times are,
and so we're always trying to make the qubits' materials as
good as possible, so their lifetimes are as long as
possible, and find the most advanced ways of operating
our gates so that the operations are fast and you can get as low
of an error rate as possible.
For scaling, one of the obvious challenges
is getting chips with lots of good qubits on them.
Our approach is to make small chiplets and to combine them
together to form coherent quantum circuits.
There's also lots of challenges with getting signals
onto the chip.
We have a 3D integration chip architecture that allows us
to deliver signals directly vertically down onto a qubit
through silicon vias that are superconducting.
We use a flip chip cap bonding process
to put a whole new layer of electronics right
on top of the qubit, and we have a superconducting interposer
approach that allows us to get signals
onto and off of the top of that chip architecture
in a way that is coherent and high performance.
DAVID RIVAS: We're headed towards clearly fully
fault-tolerant architectures, and more and more,
it's starting to seem like a 10-year time horizon
for something like that is well within the means of the doable.
We at Rigetti believe, however, it
is the iterations on the years that
are probably most important.
We firmly believe that a few hundred, or maybe
a thousand or two high performing
qubits made available to application and algorithm
developers could potentially produce results.
No machines are ever built unless it's constant iteration
with the tools that you have.
And what we're doing here is building the machines
that we have iteratively and then using them as best we can.
