
ROBERT SCHOELKOPF: Quantum information
is a fascinating and exciting field.
It's a completely new paradigm for how we store and process
information.
And it has the promise to address
certain kinds of problems that could never be solved
on conventional computers.
We've come an incredibly long way
in the last couple of decades.
When we started in the 1990s, there weren't even qubits.
At Yale, we've helped pioneer the field of circuit quantum
electrodynamics.
This is a way in which we can have
artificial, man-made elements that
behave like individual atoms and photons.
And with this approach, we can access all the special features
of the quantum domain, like superposition and entanglement.
This approach has allowed new explorations
in quantum optics, quantum measurement and quantum control.
And today, it's an emerging technology
with multiple machines available on the cloud which
allow you to log on and run your own quantum computations.
The challenge for the field today
is to scale in a useful way, and thereby
realize truly revolutionary computing power.
This requires making our computations
more robust through the magic of quantum error correction.
Here at Quantum Circuits, we focus
on the problem of detecting and correcting the inevitable errors
at the hardware level.
We do so with hardware-efficient approach
that involves having error detection built into the qubits.
In the rest of this video, we'll explain to you
how this unique approach works.
ANDREI PETRENKO: At Quantum Circuits,
we follow the circuit QED approach to quantum computing
With superconducting qubits, we use both transmons and unique
element, that is the 3D cavity.
3D cavities are great because they're high-coherence elements,
and they enable us to do high-fidelity gates.
And we actually use them, in addition,
to build these things called dual-rail qubits, which
have been around in the industry for a while, typically
in the context of photonics.
But what we do is we build them as kind of novel units
that have a number of components in them, including transmons.
We make them the physical qubits in our quantum computers.
Now, what this enables us to do is,
given the fact that single-photon loss is
the dominant error mechanism in cavities, way
beyond any other error like dephasing or bit flips or phase
flips, we can convert single-photon loss
into erasures.
And erasures are a really interesting type of error
because you know when and where that error occurred
in the circuit.
And what that allows us to do is perform things
like error detection.
And with that error detection, that gives us some novel tools
to take us down the path toward error correction
in New and interesting ways and leverage both existing codes
and think about new codes that will give us
new paths toward greater efficiency.
There are a number of challenges that we're
going to have to overcome, both as quantum circuits,
but also as an industry, to get to successful quantum computing.
So as you heard me talk about error correction before,
that's a really key topic in the industry.
That's one of the reasons we've been focusing on error detection
as a key stepping stone and milestone toward that end
with dual-rail qubits.
We're providing low-level access to erasure data in our devices
that doesn't get abstracted away.
We think this could be useful for researchers, in particular,
to understand more about noise models, error models,
and thinking about error correction codes
using photon loss and erasures as the basis.
We put out a publication in 2022 about random walk phase
estimation.
It was co-published with Microsoft's team,
and it was based on theoretical work
by Nathan Wiebe and Cassandra Granade.
It highlighted how real-time control can really yield
benefits in quantum algorithms.
We're really looking to extend those results to see
how they can benefit from quantum error detection going
forward.
We're not specializing in any single industry today.
And to take a couple of concrete examples,
we have optimizing cargo loads on airplanes or even portfolio
optimization with, let's say, Monte Carlo methods in finance.
All of those have really important implications
for how we function as a society.
And that's really going to make an impact on us
over the next 5, 10, 15 years.
So thank you for listening to the course.
Thank you for being a part of this journey
and for listening to our industry perspective.
