
In the last section, we discussed
the promise of quantum communication
and its potential for quantum advantage.
That advantage was based on three tenets of quantum
mechanics, namely quantum-enhanced channel
capacity, a concept known as superdense coding,
the no cloning theorem, which forbids
copying an unknown quantum state,
and a form of communication non-disturbance, by which
any attempt to intercept or measure quantum bits
can be detected.
We can begin to understand how these tenets enable
the promise of quantum communication
by considering the number of participants simultaneously
participating in that quantum communication.
The first example is point to point secure communication
using quantum key distribution.
Secure communication relies on the use of a private key,
essentially, a string of bits that's used
by a cryptographic algorithm.
Quantum key distribution provides
a means to securely transmit and share such a secret key.
The secret key can then be used to encrypt and decrypt
information.
Any attempt to intercept that key can be detected,
and when this happens, the compromised bits
are simply discarded and replaced
with additional secure bits.
In this way, quantum mechanics enables two parties
to communicate securely.
In addition, as we'll learn later,
quantum mechanics can also be used
to generate true randomness, a resource
for many cryptographic applications and a step
above existing classical pseudo-random number
generators.
Second are applications involving a few participants.
One important example is quantum secret sharing amongst, say,
two or more people.
Let's say Alice wishes to send a secret to both Bob and Charlie,
and she would like them to learn that information
simultaneously, so that neither Bob nor Charlie can
have an advantage over one another
by learning the secret first.
By using quantum communication to distribute
an entangled state that's shared between Bob and Charlie,
Alice has created a situation where
Bob and Charlie must coordinate to uncover what that secret is.
They can coordinate on an open classical channel,
but quantum mechanics will ensure that they receive
the information simultaneously.
Finally, a third set of applications
involves multiple distributed participants
or multiple distributed computing
nodes that, in concert, perform a quantum algorithm.
One example is quantum scheduling,
which uses Grover's algorithm to search for a time
when n distributed people are available.
Another example is related to distributed computing systems,
such as the leader election problem.
In this application, a unique leader or a master node,
must be chosen from amongst all of the distributed computing
nodes.
In both cases, it's known that quantum communication
and quantum computing together provide an advantage
over classical approaches.
Despite the promise and numerous examples
of problems where quantum communication gives
an advantage, there are only a few examples
of practical applications to date.
One application that's available now, even commercialized,
is quantum key distribution or QKD.
In QKD schemes, Alice and Bob want to share a private key,
and any attempts by Eve to intercept it can be detected.
There are demonstrations of QKD using photons
over 100 kilometers of optical fiber
and even a demonstration of transmitting signals
between two points on earth using satellite quantum
communication.
In fact, QKD even serves as a foil
to quantum codebreaking by Shor's algorithm.
As we've already discussed, Shor's algorithm
can efficiently break RSA public key encryption.
In fact, it's also efficient against
Diffie-Hellman key exchange and elliptic curve
cryptographic schemes.
However, messages encrypted using a one time
pad are, in principle, secure.
One time pad schemes use each bit in a key
only once and then discard it.
They therefore need to be continually renewed,
and this can be done securely with QKD.
The main issue with QKD security is
that, as with most cryptographic schemes,
there are many channels for attack.
For example, one must generally control access
to the hardware that's used to implement a QKD scheme.
Another limitation is signal attenuation.
Classical communication links use repeaters to regenerate
and amplify a signal.
However, due to the no-cloning theorem,
this is not so straightforward with quantum communication.
Instead, as we'll learn later in the course,
a quantum version of repeaters has
been proposed that can effectively
extend communication lengths using quantum teleportation
and distributed entanglement.
In conjunction with quantum memory,
distributed entanglement would enable a quantum communication
link to be established.
Other applications that may be useful
include quantum secret sharing, auctioning or voting
without attribution, the use of verifiable quantum digital
signatures, and message authentication.
For all of these examples, developing robust protocols
and hardware systems that are immune to compromise
will be necessary to fully realize the promise of quantum
communication schemes.
