
Just as quantum mechanics can dramatically
enhance the way we process information,
it also has the potential to enhance the way
we communicate information.
So in this section let's take a look
at the promise of quantum communication.
Communication broadly defined is the conveyance of information,
and it encompasses both sending that information
as well as receiving it.
It certainly refers to verbal communication between people
as well as nonverbal forms such as written text and signatures.
And it often comes in an encoded form.
For example, the digital zeros and ones
that are created by sampling our voices on a cell phone
or representing the words of an email that are then routed
from one computer to another.
In fact, even information on a chip
must be shuttled around, communicated
between a processor and its memory.
And this concept can even be extended
to include several spatially distributed
computing nodes, all of which are available to attack
a particular problem, but must be coordinated and therefore
require communication between these different nodes.
All of these are examples of classical communication.
But quantum communication is different,
and it represents a fundamentally different means
to encode, convey, and authenticate information.
These differences and the potential promise
of quantum communication are reflected in three basic facts
or theorems.
The first is that classical information encoded in qubits
can be transmitted two times faster than by classical means.
This is achieved using a concept known as superdense coding,
and it's a provable quantum enhancement.
Basically, two bits of classical information
can be transmitted using a single qubit when
that qubit is part of an entangled pair of qubits called
a bell state.
Now, that's, of course, two qubits,
but I only needed to transmit one of them
to send two classical bits.
That's superdense coding.
The second is that quantum bits cannot be copied or cloned.
And it's, again, a provable consequence
of quantum mechanics.
Now, of course, if I prepared a qubit in a given state,
I know that state and so I can prepare a second qubit
in the same state.
But if I have a qubit in an unknown state,
I can't make an exact copy of it,
and that's called the no cloning theorem.
The third fact is that attempts to intercept or measure quantum
bits can be detected.
Clearly, those bits cannot be duplicated by the no cloning
theorem.
And so an eavesdropper must make some kind of measurement
in order to glean any information.
And it's the measurement process that
always leaves a signature that's detectable in some way.
So what is needed to leverage these three facts
and realize the promise of quantum communication
in practice?
Well, to realize quantum advantage we
need to identify problems at the intersection of three
key applications.
The first is to find a problem that
can leverage the enhanced capacity to encode information
that's enabled by quantum mechanics.
Second, there are problems related to authentication.
The ability to confirm the identity of an individual
or the truth of a particular attribute.
And third are problems associated with collaboration,
collaboration between people or agents such as secret sharing
or game theory.
For example, enhance means to auction
or to vote without attribution.
Or using quantum mechanics to verifiably share
public goods in a way that avoids
certain rational yet self-destructive tendencies
such as the tragedy of the commons.
Realizing the promise of quantum communication
will require finding problems that exhibit quantum advantage.
And in the next section, we'll take a look
at several such problems.
