In the last section, we
saw the promise of quantum computing
and its potential for quantum advantage.
But although a quantum computer can
do anything a classical computer can do,
it often doesn't know better.
And in fact, we only have a small set of useful algorithms
at our disposal today.
So what can we do to realize the promise of quantum computing?
Quantum advantage starts with having useful quantum
algorithms, and developing new algorithms is very challenging,
in large part because quantum computers
are based on quantum mechanics.
And so developing an algorithm for a quantum computer
is quite different than doing so on a classical computer.
To understand how quantum algorithms work
and what they can do, there are currently
a couple different approaches.
One is to develop algorithms based on mathematical theorems
and their proofs.
Shor's algorithm and Grover's algorithm
are both good examples.
Based on either intuition or insight into the problem,
a quantum algorithm is first proposed,
and then it's theoretically determined if the algorithm is
efficient or not.
For example, proving that an n bit number
can be factored with high probability in a time
that scales polynomially with the size of that n bit number,
rather than exponentially.
Again, this type of development generally
requires insight into a particular structure
of the problem that lends itself to enhancement on a quantum
computer.
A second approach is to use classical computers
to simulate the behavior of quantum computers,
to glean some insight into algorithmic primitives that
can then be used to realize quantum enhancement in larger
systems.
Now, as you might imagine, simulating a quantum
computer with a classical computer is not very efficient.
After all, if we could easily simulate a quantum computer,
then we wouldn't need to build one.
Currently, classical supercomputers
with significant effort can simulate about 50 qubits.
And various probabilistic and Monte Carlo
techniques have been developed that can further
increase the qubit number in exchange
for accuracy or completeness in the solution.
Again, these kinds of classical simulations
can provide insights into how a quantum algorithm works
at small scales, so it can be leveraged in quantum
algorithms run on larger scale quantum computers.
To go beyond small scale simulations,
a third approach is to just throw caution to the wind,
build a quantum system, and see what happens.
The D-Wave system is a great example of this approach.
D-Wave's built a quantum annealer with more than 5,000
qubits, a fantastic engineering achievement.
And although there is as yet no indisputable theoretical or
experimental evidence pointing to a quantum
enhancement in quantum annealers,
there's a lot that we don't know.
And as we discussed in week one, because optimization problems
are so important, there's a tremendous application pool
to develop quantum enhanced optimization tools.
And so getting a real machine into the hands of engineers,
computer scientists, and algorithm designers
is a great way to start learning what
is and is not possible with the various quantum computing
approaches.
So developing quantum algorithms is very challenging,
and tremendous efforts have been applied to their development.
And it's because of this that we have useful or potentially
useful algorithms today.
Examples in the useful now category
are Shor's factoring algorithm and Grover's search algorithm.
Shor's algorithm can be used to break public key cryptosystems
and affords an exponential speedup
over known classical algorithms.
Doing so at a meaningful scale requires a medium-sized quantum
computer with thousands of logical qubits.
Although we don't have such quantum computers yet,
they are foreseeable, and as such, research today is oriented
towards developing new quantum resistant
public key cryptography standards,
as well as a new generation of quantum algorithms
to break them.
Grover's algorithm is related to a general class of search,
collision, and optimization algorithms
that afford quantum advantage over known classical algorithms.
However, currently, more research
is needed to help make these algorithms practical.
There are a couple of reasons for this.
One is the data-loading problem.
For example, how efficiently we can load large amounts of data
into a quantum computer so it can be efficiently searched.
In addition, there's currently a rather limited range
of problem sizes that admit benefit,
namely problems that are large enough
to make use of the quantum advantage,
and yet, not so large that it becomes practically
prohibitive to operate on a human time scale.
For example, a quantum enhancement
that reduces the runtime from a few thousand years
to a few decades is obviously a fantastic improvement,
but very few people would find that useful.
Although Shor's and Grover's algorithms are perhaps
the most well-known examples of a quantum algorithm,
it's widely anticipated that quantum simulation
will have the greatest economic impact in the future.
Simulation would apply broadly to a range of problems,
from solid state and nuclear physics to material science
and chemistry, and these are problems of importance
to both science and industry.
Classical simulations of quantum systems
are generally limited to very small problem sizes or an array
of simplifying assumptions, such as no entanglement
or semiclassical dynamics.
Exact solutions are generally intractable because the number
of variables needed to describe a fully quantum system
grows exponentially with the problem size.
It's been shown that quantum simulations are
able to efficiently model quantum systems,
and the hope is that some of these problems
may see quantum advantage on smaller scale or even error
prone quantum computers.
Whether or not this is achievable remains
an open question.
Other quantum algorithms in the maybe useful category
include sampling solutions to linear equations,
adiabatic optimization problems, and machine learning.
In these cases, the ultimate degree of quantum advantage
will depend on a number of factors,
including input/output complexity, such as the loading
problem I mentioned earlier, and making a meaningful connection
to applications.
In addition, to offer useful advantage,
these algorithms must also outperform
existing heuristics-- classical computing
methods that, while not guaranteed
to give an exact or optimal answer,
do give very high quality solutions,
and that's often sufficient for many applications.
So in summary, developing quantum
algorithms that exhibit quantum advantage
is at the heart of realizing the promise of a quantum computer.
And in the next video, we'll take a look
at the degree and type of quantum enhancement
these algorithms provide.
