
Like classical computers, quantum computers
have a software stack used in the development of programs,
analysis of designs, and testing of constructive programs
and circuits.
The function and examples of these quantum software tools
is a topic of this section.
Let's start by contrasting quantum software tools
to classical ones to perform similar types of functions.
To create a classical circuit design,
one may use a schematic capture CAD tool.
A quantum analog to this is the circuit composer
from IBM's quantum experience.
For program based designs, for example,
HDL circuit designs written in VHDL or Verilog,
or high level computer programs written in a language like c++,
one uses a compiler to translate the program to a lower level
format.
Numerous quantum compilers exist that perform the same function.
Some examples include Quipper developed
by Dalhousie University and Q sharp from Microsoft.
These quantum compilers typically
produce an intermediate format known as QASM,
or quantum assembly language.
Finally, to translate a program or circuit to a format
that a machine can execute, one uses an assembler.
A similar function is required for quantum circuits.
Each hardware platform will have specific gates
that it can execute, and the connectivity that it provides
is specific to the topology constraints of the technology.
Mapping from QASM programs to hardware
is something that IBM's QISKit software
performs, in this case, for superconductor
based technology.
For classical circuit designs, a circuit simulation tool
like Spice is commonly used to determine circuit properties
like power consumption, timing, and to verify
correctness of the circuit.
For quantum circuits, one of the main concerns
is how noise or errors impact the operation of the circuit.
Quantum simulation tools exist at multiple levels
of abstraction that model air in the operation
of quantum circuits.
Quantum assimilation tools are also
used to calculate the fidelity of gates operating
under the control of control waveforms,
and to verify correctness of circuits.
The last category of tools are those used
for testing of fabricated chips, PCBs, et cetera.
For classical chips, one may use hardware and software tools,
such as JTAG and boundary scan to verify
the operation of a chip.
For quantum circuits, quantum characterization, validation,
and verification, or QCVV tools provide a similar function.
These tools evaluate results obtained from experimental runs
to calculate the Fidelity devices
and to verify their correctness.
Let's now talk about the main steps
one would use to program a quantum computer.
Program generation, hardware specific circuit mapping,
and hardware control and execution.
The program generation phase is hardware agnostic,
whereas the other two phases deal
with aspects that are specific to the architecture
of the hardware platform.
Another difference between quantum computing systems
and classical ones is that the control and processing
systems are typically separate.
There is a classical system for control,
and a quantum device for processing.
In many cases, these two systems are physically separated.
For example, a superconducting quantum computer
may use room temperature instruments for control,
whereas the quantum circuits require millikelvin
temperatures, and must be located within a dilution
refrigerator.
Let's now look at the three main methods
for program generation, the first being schematic capture.
One of the front ends to IBM's quantum experience,
the composer tool is an example of a schematic capture
tool, where one uses a GUI to construct a circuit consisting
of one and two qubit gates and measurements.
The tool knows of underlying hardware constraints,
and prevents the user from violating these.
In many cases, it is more convenient to specify
the quantum circuit as a program, which
allows for the specification of larger scale circuits.
This leads to the motivation behind the second method
for program generation, high level quantum languages.
Examples of this are tools like Quipper, Q Sharp, and Scaffold.
High level programs written in these languages
are compiled into QASM circuits, or can be
displayed as circuit diagrams.
The last method for program generation that we will discuss
is problem specific generation.
Google's Open Fermion software tool
is an example of this method.
This particular package is designed specifically
for formulating simulations of quantum chemistry.
An advantage of this approach is that it
incorporates the steps and the known methods used
for the particular class of problems,
without requiring the user to know detailed domain knowledge
or the methods used to solve these problems.
A user specifies a problem at a high level,
and the package generates a quantum circuit
that can be mapped to a hardware specific platform or simulation systems.
And so we have seen the type of software tools
that are commonly used to program a quantum computer,
and how these tools are similar to tools
used for classical computers.
In the next section, we'll look at other types of software
used in the control, design, and testing of quantum computers.
