
In this section, we'll introduce the Deutsch-Jozsa Algorithm.
Deutsch-Jozsa was one of the first quantum algorithms
that exhibited a provable, exponential speed up
over a classical algorithm.
In this section, we'll learn how it works
and walk through its key steps.
And by the end of this week, you'll
implement it for yourselves on a real cloud based
quantum computer.
To get started, imagine that we have an unknown function f.
It takes N Bits as input, and it outputs a single result,
either a 0 or a 1.
Now, all we know about this function
is that it has a unique property.
It's either a constant function or it's a balanced function.
OK.
What do we mean by that?
Well, a constant function takes any input,
and no matter what that input may be, the function always
outputs the same result. For example, independent
of the input, the function always outputs
a zero, or no matter the input, it always outputs a one.
A balanced function, on the other hand,
will take those inputs, and for half of them,
we don't specify which half, but for half of them
it'll output a zero and for the other half it'll output a one.
In this sense, the output is balanced.
The Deutsch-Jozsa problem is the following.
Determine whether a function f is
constant or balanced based on queries that you
make of the function f.
You can send any input state to the function
and you get a result back, and you can query the function
as many times as you like.

Now for N Bits, there are two to the n-th power
different input states that you can choose from.
And you'll need to run the function for at least half
of them to determine with certainty if the function is
constant or balanced.

In fact, you'll have to do it for half plus one.
That's because even if you get all zeros for the first half
of the states you try, you'll need
to try one more just to see if the second half remains zeros,
a constant function, or all ones, a balanced function.
Thus, a deterministic classical algorithm
will take 2 to the N divided by 2 plus 1 steps.
And it always works.
Now, if you have N Qubits instead,
you can create an equal superposition state of all N
Qubits, and as we'll see, determine
the answer in just one step.
And it always works.
And that's an exponential speed up.
To see how this works in detail, let's simplify the problem
to just one bit or one qubit.
It's the same approach as for N Bits or N Qubits,
but it'll be much easier to follow if we just
take n equals to one.
In this case, for a constant function we have f of 0
equals f of 1 and the output is either a 0 for both of them,
or it's a one for both of them.
And for a balanced function, one of the outputs is 0
and the other is 1.
In the truth table, we can make the following observation,
that if we take the exclusive or of f of 0 and f of 1,
the result is 0 for a constant function
and it's 1 for a balanced function.
In this case, classically it takes two steps
to implement the algorithm for n equal one.
And again, quantum mechanically it only takes one step.
Now, that may not seem like a big speed up.
It's only twice as fast, but in fact, for N equal one,
it is an exponential speed up.
And this generalizes to any number N that you may choose.
Again, we're going with N equal one
because it'll be easier to see how the algorithm works.
To implement the Deutsch-Jozsa Algorithm for N equal 1,
we actually need two qubits.
One is the data qubit, that's the N equal one qubit,
and the other is a helper qubit or an ancilla qubit.
And we'll use the quantum circuit model
to implement this algorithm.
First, we initialize the qubits into their starting states.
The data qubit is prepared in state zero and the helper qubit
in state one.
As we proceed through the algorithm,
we'll indicate the position at each stage of the algorithm
and also the state of these two qubits.
For example, after initialization we
see that the data qubit is in state zero
and the helper qubit is in state one.
To keep it all straight we'll use
yellow to highlight the data qubit state and green
to highlight the helper qubit state.
We first create an equal superposition state
by applying a Hadamard gate to both qubits.
This results in a superposition state for each qubit.
There's a plus sign for the data qubit
since it started in state zero and a minus sign for the helper
qubit since it started in state one.
Next, we'll just expand out the terms in the data qubit.
The zero state tensor product, the helper qubit superposition
state plus one state tensor product, the helper qubit
state.
This state is then input into the quantum circuit block.
We'll just call it U sub f.
The data qubit is x and the helper qubit is y.
U sub f implements the set of logical operations.
And it does two things.
First, it implements the unknown function f,
and second, it outputs the exclusive or of bits
y and f of x.
We'll show later how this can be implemented with single qubit
and two qubit operations.
For now, though, let's just figure out what happens.
At the output of U sub f, we have the helper qubit.
And it takes on the state y, x, or f of x.
So where the data qubit is zero, the helper qubit
is x ord with f of 0.
And where the data qubit is one the helper qubit state
is x ord with f of 1.
Now we make an observation.
You should try this on scratch paper
to convince yourself that the expression can be written
in this way with a minus 1 to the f of 0 power and a minus 1
to the f of 1 power.
To check, there are four cases to consider.
For example, if f of x equals 0 for any x,
the x or expressions on the left maintain the superposition 0
minus 1.
However, if f of x equals 1 for any x,
then the x or expressions on the left result in 1 minus 0.
And to return this to the superposition state 0 minus 1,
we need to multiply by a minus 1.
This is achieved by taking minus 1 to the fx power.
And when fx equals 1, this is the minus one
that we're looking for.
The expression also works when f of 0 and f of 1
are not equal, but take on the values 0 and 1, the third case,
or 1 and zero, the fourth case.
The fact that this works for all four cases
simultaneously is an example of quantum parallelism.
In the next step we factor out the helper qubit term 0 minus 1
divided by root 2.
And we move the minus 1 to the f of 0 power and the minus 1
to the f of 1 power over to the data qubit.
Next, we apply Hadamard gates to the data and helper qubits.
On the data qubit, state zero rotates to 0 plus 1
and state 1 rotates to 0 minus 1.
For the helper qubit, 0 minus 1 rotates to state 1.
Next, we just note that minus 1 to the f of x power
is the same as e to the power minus i pi f of x.
And then we just rearrange terms to collect
the coefficients of state zero and the coefficients of state
one.
And this is an example of where quantum interference occurs,
changing the values of the coefficients
depending on whether the function is
constant or balanced.
For example, if f of 0 equals f of 1,
a constant function, then b equals 0 and a
is either plus or minus 1.
Thus, a measurement will yield state 0 with unity probability.
And we observe that state zero is equivalent to state f of 0,
x ord with f of 1.
In contrast, if f of 0 does not equal f of 1,
a balanced function, then a equals 0 and b
is plus or minus 1.
In this case, a measurement will yield state one
with unity probability.
And we observe that state one can also
be replaced with the state f of 0, x or f of 1.
Thus, if we measure a 0 on the data qubit,
the function is constant, but if we measure a 1
on the data qubit, the function is balanced, and we’ll always
measure a state one on the helper qubit.
And so with one evaluation of the quantum algorithm
we were able to determine whether the function was
constant or balanced.
And the same is true if we had instead used N data qubits.
One evaluation always works.
In contrast, the classical case must evaluate half of the 2
to the N states plus one to get a deterministic answer.
And so the quantum speed up is one step versus 2
to the N minus 1 plus 1 steps.
Lastly, we can look at ways to implement the logical operation
U sub f.
I won't talk through all of them here.
You can find them in the text unit following this video.
But there are four cases corresponding
to the two constant functions 0, 0 and 1, 1,
and the two balanced functions 0, 1 and 1, 0.
I encourage you to work through each of these cases.
Now that we understand how the Deutsch-Jozsa Algorithm works
within the quantum circuit model,
we're ready to write a quantum computer
program that will implement it on a quantum computer.
And we'll see how that generally is done in the next section,
and then more specifically in the lab practicum.
