
As you saw previously, a quantum computer
requires a classical control system.
For small to medium sized quantum computers,
the control can be realized using commercially available
instruments-- for example, arbitrary waveform
generators, microwave sources, and laser systems.
Software is required to program and synchronize
the various instruments required.
Labber is one example of this type of software.
This software also provides a result visualization
and logging functions.
Quantum computer control systems that are custom designs
require firmware and software control software.
IBM's QISKit for superconducting circuits and ARTIQ
for ion traps are examples of these types of software control
systems.
Additionally, and especially for small scale experiments,
many experimental groups use homegrown software control
systems.
Let's now discuss hardware testing and validation
of quantum systems, which is typically
performed with the aid of analysis techniques
and software known as QCVV, Quantum Characterization,
Verification, and Validation.
These techniques take the results
of a sequence of experiments and produce descriptive metrics,
like gate fidelity or operator descriptions of the underlying
gates.
Two of the most popular techniques in use
today are randomized benchmarking and gate
set tomography.
In randomized benchmarking, an experiment
consists of a long sequences of repeated target
gate interspersed with random other gates.
The random gates essentially randomize the error
seen in the target gate and allow
us to calculate the average fidelity of this target gate.
This procedure also mitigates the impact
that imperfect state preparation and measurement
have on the fidelity.
One of the disadvantages of randomized benchmarking
is that it only provides a single metric for the gate--
namely, the fidelity-- which may not be sufficient to help
diagnose the cause of error in the system.
Gate set tomography goes beyond randomized benchmarking
by providing process map descriptions of the quantum
gates.
These process maps are operator descriptions
of both the gate and the error seen in the experiment.
Both randomized benchmarking and gate set
tomography require a large amount of data
and are, therefore, limited to the analysis of small quantum
systems.
Developing scalable QCVV techniques
is an ongoing area of research, which
will be increasingly important as larger quantum
systems emerge.
As mentioned earlier, noise and error
is a major concern in today's quantum devices and computers.
One of the main uses of quantum simulation software
is to understand the impact of this noise.
One can apply modeling and simulation
at many different levels of abstraction, ranging
from finite element models of materials to devices
all the way up to quantum circuit models.
QuTiP is a Python-based package that
provides libraries useful for modeling and simulating
open quantum systems, i.e. systems
interacting with unwanted degrees of freedom
in the environment.
Static modeling can also be applied to devices and circuits
to obtain important metrics affecting
their performance as qubits.
These metrics include the coherence time of the qubits
and the sensitivity of the qubit to specific types of noise.
Simulating the performance of quantum error correction
circuits is another important use of modeling and simulation.
Here, one uses simulation to determine the logical error
rate of the circuit and to determine
the scaling of this logical error rate
as a function of the error rate of the individual physical
devices.
One final example of simulation does not involve error at all.
Simulation is also used to understand
the computational advantage that quantum computers have
over classical ones.
Quantum supremacy circuits have been
proposed as circuits that are difficult to simulate
classically but are easy for a quantum computer to execute.
Several groups have developed parallel simulators,
which run on high performance computing systems,
and use these simulators to determine
how large a circuit is required to demonstrate a quantum
advantage.
And so in summary quantum computers
have a software stack that serves the same purpose
as the software stack used for classical computers.
These quantum software tools are important for programming,
design, and testing of today's quantum computers.
And it will be even more important
to the goal of realizing large scale quantum computers.
