
In the last section, we introduced a circuit model
for classical computation.
This model included an initialization stage
to set the input bits, a compute stage that implemented
classical logic gates to compute a function,
and a measurement stage to extract the output.
In this section, we'll introduce an analogous circuit
model for quantum computation.
The basic structure is the same.
Initialize, compute, and measure.
We'll start with an initialization stage
where the qubits are first reset to state 0
and then initialized to their input values.
We'll assume here that the initial state is also 0, 0, 0.
The initialized qubits are then input to the computation stage
where a series of quantum logic operations will be performed.
In general, one of the first steps in this block
is to create an equal superposition state.
This is done by applying single qubit Hadamard
gates to the input register.
To see how this works, let's first
consider just a single qubit in state zero.
The Hadamard gate applied to this qubit takes state 0
and rotates it to an equal superposition state, 0 plus 1,
and the normalization constant is 1 over square root of 2.
Now what happens when we have two qubits each initialized
in states zero?
Applying a Hadamard gate to each one
independently rotates each into an equal superposition state
0 plus 1.
And when we take the tensor product effectively multiplying
out the terms, we find an equal superposition state
of 2 qubits, 0, 0 plus 0, 1 plus 1, 0 plus 1, 1.
And now the normalization is the square of 1
over root 2, which is 1/2.
Similarly, applying a Hadamard gate to three qubits,
each initialized in state zero, results
in an equal superposition state of three qubits.
As we've seen before, this state comprises eight terms,
from state 0, 0, 0 all the way to state 1, 1, 1.
And the normalization is now 1 over root 2 cubed.
And each coefficient now has this value.
Creating a large, equal superposition state
sets the stage for quantum parallelism and quantum
interference to occur during quantum logic operations.
The logic operations themselves are the single qubit
and two qubit gates we discussed earlier.
For example, a single qubit X gate or another Hadamard gate
or a two qubit CNOT gate, chosen to implement
a particular function or algorithm.
And as we saw in week one, the quantum parallelism and quantum
interference that occurred during these operations
changed the values of the coefficients
in the superposition state.
And finally, the qubits are then measured
to determine the answer.
And as we also saw earlier in the course,
the measurement process projects the qubits
onto the measurement basis.
This effectively collapses the massive superposition state
onto a single classical state with a probability that's
the magnitude squared of its coefficient.
In doing so, the measurement leads
to a single classical binary result, either a 0 or a 1
for each qubit.
Now if we don't perform any logic operations
and simply measure the equal superposition
state from the input, each coefficient has the same value
and we have an equal probability, one eighth,
of measuring any one of these states.
Thus as we discussed earlier in the course, to be successful,
a quantum algorithm is designed such
that after applying a designated sequence of quantum logic
gates, ideally, all of the probability amplitude
resides in one of the coefficients.
And this coefficient sits in front of the state
that encodes the answer to our problem.
Thus when we make a projective measurement,
the probability is unity that we obtain this result.
Using this basic quantum circuit model, initialize, compute,
and measure, we can implement a universal quantum algorithm.
And in the next section, we'll apply this model
to a specific example, the Deutsch-Jozsa algorithm.
