
I think one of the most exciting developments in quantum
computing in recent years has been the ubiquitous access
to real quantum devices.
Just a couple of years ago in a course like this,
students would learn about concepts and quantum
information and quantum computation
without any real means for hands on experimentation.
But in 2016 with the launch of the IBM Q Experience,
the first generation of quantum computers came online.
They've generated a lot of excitement,
with nearly 80,000 unique users running more than three
million experiments.
And this video, I would like to introduce you
to some of the resources that will help you get started
with quantum programming.
Let's start by looking at the composer, which
is a simple graphical user interface for building
and executing quantum programs.
This space has two parts.
In the top part, you see information
about the devices that are available for experiments.
On the left, you see a schematic of the chip
where each white square is one of the qubits.
And right next to that is a diagram of how the qubits
are connected to each other.
This connectivity diagram influences the operations
that you're able to do on this device,
as we'll see in a moment.
One important thing that we have to get
used to when working with quantum computers
is that they're always noisy and imperfect.
So on the right, you see a lot of information
about the level of noise on each of these qubits
and each of the gates.
In fact, you don't have to believe these numbers.
You can design and run certain experiments
that will let you measure the exact errors.
There's a lot more interesting data about each of these chips.
For example, you see that this particular one
is sitting in a dilution refrigerator
with a temperature of around 21 milliKelvin, which is colder
than the surface of Pluto.
At the bottom of the page is the composer itself.
You can see there are five wires, each representing
one of the qubits in our quantum computer.
And on the panel on the right, we
have the gates that are available for building
our quantum circuit.
As you know, the circuit model is a simple, yet powerful model
for quantum computation.
A quantum circuit is basically a recipe
for how to transform the state of a number of qubits
by applying various gates to them.
It can be shown that any quantum computation can
be done by just operating on one or two qubits at a time.
And the very small set of gates is enough for universal quantum
computation.
So as simple as this interface seems,
you can do quite complex computations with it.
So let's do a simple entanglement experiment.
All of the qubits initially start out
as being in the zero state.
To create an entangled pair of qubits,
we first put one of the qubits in a superposition state
by applying a Hadamard gate to it.
Next, we toggle the second qubit conditioned on the first qubit
by applying a CNOT gate.
This leaves the qubits to go in a state of 0, 0 plus 1, 1,
a state that cannot be described in terms of the state of each
qubit individually.
This is an entangled state.
But how can we know what state the qubits are in?
The qubit's state space is inaccessible to us.
And the only way we can get any information
is to measure the qubits.
So let's add two final measurement operations
to this circuit.

But each time we measure the qubits,
we read a normal classical bitstream, such as 0, 0 or 1,
1.
So to be able to infer the state of the qubits right
before the measurement, we have to repeat this experiment
many times and thus approximate the probability
distribution that existed with the entangled states.
So now that we're done building our circuit, let's execute it.
You see that you have the option of either sending
your circuit to a simulator or to real hardware.
First, let's do a simulation to make
sure our circuit is working as expected.
And here is what we get, a histogram
of all the measurement outcomes.
By default in the IBM Q Experience,
each circuit will be executed about 1,000 times.
As we expected, roughly 50% of the time
we measured both qubits in state 0.
And the other 50% of the time, we
measured both qubits in state 1.
This is an indication of the state correlations
that arise as a result of quantum entanglement.
Now let's submit the circuit to a real quantum computer.
By clicking Run, your circuit will
be sent to the IBM Research Labs in New York where
they will be translated to the language
of qubit manipulations, namely control pulses.
After we receive the measurement results,
we see that, indeed, the same outcome is achieved.
However, there are some imperfections here
in the result.
And this is exactly due to the noisy qubits and gates
that I talked about earlier.
The composer is a great tool for just playing around
and visualizing your circuits.
However, you may prefer to build or alter
your circuits more quickly.
You can do this by switching to the QASM
Editor, which gives you a textual representation
of the circuit.
You can also import QASM from file.
QASM, or quantum assembly, is a circuit description language.
In fact, the graphical interface we were using previously
was being translated to QASM code under the hood.
QASM is a hardware agnostic language,
meaning it can be translated to any physical chip or even
a different quantum computing technology altogether.
It expresses data dependencies without explicit timings
for the instructions, which will be decided at a later stage.
Here we see the same circuit we just built written in QASM.
The first line imports a standard library
of gates for us to use.
This is exactly akin to the menu of gates we had previously.
The next two lines define the qubits
in the form of a quantum register of size 5
and the classical bits, which will
be used to hold our final measurement results.
Finally, we have the Hadamard, CNOT,
and measurement operations.
Let's suppose that we want to repeat our entangling
experiment, but this time on two different qubits,
let's say qubit 2 and 3.
This seems trivial.
We just change the indices on Q and C.
However, we get an error message saying that a CNOT is not
allowed from Q2 to Q3.
That's right.
This is due to the connectivity graph of the qubits
in this particular chip.
We see that in order to do a CNOT operation
between these two qubits, we need
to designate Q3 as a control and Q2 as a target.
Luckily, there is an easy transformation that
can be used to flip a CNOT.
This circuit identity is achieved
by sandwiching the CNOT that we have
between two layers of Hadamards, giving us the flipped CNOT.
Now we repeat the experiment on the real chip again.
We see the same result as we expected.
If you look closely, however, you
see that the accuracy of the results
are a little bit degraded compared
to our previous experiment.
This is because our new circuit uses more gates
and this leads to a higher chance of errors accumulating
in the circuit.
To conclude, it's pretty easy to use the IBM Q Experience
to program a quantum computer.
All the many layers of technology
that goes into building a working quantum computing stack
is conveniently abstracted away.
Quantum information science is no longer only done in the lab.
Now you can control a real quantum computer remotely.
While these devices are still small and noisy, in a way,
they force us to be more clever in using them.
For example, we have to take into account the connectivity
of the qubits and try to use fewer gates in order
to preserve information fidelity.
If you visit the IBM Q Experience user guide,
you'll see many more interesting examples of quantum information
science, each one accompanied it with its composer circuit
and QASM code.
And I also encourage you to get involved in the Community
Forum, which is a great place to discuss anything related
to quantum computing and learning from each other.
