
This week, we're going to run an actual quantum
algorithm, the Deutsch Jozsa algorithm,
on a real quantum computer.
And of course, we'll first discuss in detail
how that works.
To do this, we'll need to introduce
the algorithm using a circuit model of quantum computation.
But before we do that, let's first
look at an example of a circuit model
in the context of classical computation.
The circuit model for classical computation
begins with input data prepared at the initialization stage.
We can think of the computational bits in the input
register being reset to all zeros
and then set to the initial values that
will be input to the computer.
Now, this reset step may not be absolutely
necessary in a classical computer.
But we'll include it here for comparison
with the quantum circuit model that we'll discuss later.
The initialized bits are then input to a computational stage.
Here, a series of logical operations
are implemented using classical Boolean logic gates to compute
a series of functions.
And once this is complete, the output for this stage
encodes the result of the computation.
For example, let's consider a full adder circuit
comprising a series of Boolean logic gates.
The full adder takes as inputs the bits B1 through B3.
Where B1 and B2 are the binary numbers we want to add
and B3 holds any carry in that we may have
from a previous calculation.
Here we don't have a carry forward so its value is zero.
An output of this circuit is the sum, B1 plus B2 modulo 2,
where the modulo 2 arises because this
is binary arithmetic.
The second output is the arithmetic
carry out that may result from the addition.
These two values are then assigned to bits B4 and B5
and stored in the output register.
In this case, we add 1 plus 1, which
is of course 2 with decimal numbers.
And for the binary addition performed by this circuit,
the addition is modulo 2, 1 plus 1 equals 0, and has
a carry forward of 1.
Finally, the results from this addition problem
are obtained in a measurement stage, where
the values of bits B4 and B5 are the binary representation
of the answer, which may be then converted back
to a decimal result.
This type of initialized, compute and measure process
is the foundation for a universal classical machine.
To access this machine, a user interface
provides the input data and the program instruction
set that will calculate a desired function.
This instruction set is then applied
to the physical hardware using a controller layer.
This layer takes the input data, sets the input bits,
implements the physical logic gates
according to the instruction set, measures the output,
and then sends the resulting data
back to the user interface.
This computational model illustrates the basic building
blocks that we'll need to implement an algorithm using
a quantum circuit model.
The main distinction will be the role of quantum mechanics
and its impact on the initialization, compute
and measurement stages.
