
There are various forms of quantum key distribution or QKD
described by different protocols.
They all make use of quantum mechanical properties
to establish shared lists of random numbers
that can be used for encryption.
You have heard about the BB84 QKD protocol
where one user, Alice, prepares a specific state that she
sends to another user, Bob.
Bob then measures the state, and Alice and Bob
then perform sifting by comparing the preparation
basis and the measurement basis, and then
follow several classical postprocessing steps
to establish secure encryption keys.
Protocols of this sort, which make
use of quantum superposition where one party prepares
a state and the other party measures it,
are called prepare and measure QKD protocols.
An alternative set of protocols are
called entanglement-based protocols,
and they make use of entanglement.
Two common and related entanglement-based protocols
are the BBM92 protocol, named for its inventors
Bennett, Brassard, and Merman, and for its invention year of 1992,
and E91 or Ekert protocol, invented by Artur Ekert
in 1991.
In both of these protocols, a transmitter
consisting of an entanglement source
generates a two-photon entangled state
known as a maximally entangled Bell
state, with one photon being sent to Alice
and the other photon being sent to Bob.
The photons are sent across quantum communication channels
that can reliably transmit the single-photon states
and preserve their entanglement.
The relevant property of Bell states
is that the photons are correlated
in multiple measurement bases, including the basis consisting
of the horizontal and vertical photon polarizations
and the 45-degree rotated basis consisting
of the diagonal and the antidiagonal polarizations.
For an ideal transmission across the channel,
if Alice and Bob choose the same measurement basis,
their measurement results will be perfectly
correlated between the measurement devices,
but individual measurements at each side will look random.
Alternately, if Alice chooses the horizontal-vertical basis
and Bob chooses the diagonal-antidiagonal
measurement basis, the measurements
will not be correlated at all.
And for intermediate basis choices,
their measurements will be partly correlated.
In the BBM92 protocol, Alice and Bob
received their entangled photon, and both
choose either the horizontal-vertical
or the diagonal-antidiagonal measurement basis.
They both record their basis choice
and what the actual measurement result is.
They repeat this many times, and they now
have long lists of chosen measurement bases
and measurement results.
The remaining protocol steps are identical to the previously
described BB84 protocol, namely Alice and Bob
use a classical communication channel
to announce their chosen measurement
bases to sift out only the instances of them choosing
the same basis.
They then compare a random subset of measurement results
to determine how well the quantum channel performed.
And if the determined error rate is below 20%,
they perform classical postprocessing
to erase any information that a potential eavesdropper could
have discovered and to correct for remaining
errors between Alice and Bob.
The benefit of the BBM92 protocol
is that the protocol does not require
that we trust the source that prepares and sends the state.
The protocol ensures that there is no way for a malicious actor
to take control of the source and spoof Alice
and Bob without them detecting it
by observing lower correlation strengths and thus higher error
rates than are required to form a secure key.
The other entanglement-based protocol, the Ekert protocol,
is similar but adds an interesting twist.
In this protocol, the same sort of state
is generated and distributed between Alice and Bob.
Now, Alice randomly chooses between one
of three measurement bases--
the horizontal-vertical basis, the 45-degree rotated
diagonal-antidiagonal basis, and an intermediate basis
rotated by 22 and 1/2 degrees.
Bob also randomly chooses between three bases--
the horizontal-vertical basis, the intermediate 22
and 1/2-degree rotated basis, and a final basis rotated by 67
and 1/2 degrees.
The measurement bases and the measurement results
are recorded.
Alice and Bob repeat this many times
and again announce their chosen measurement bases
over a public classical communication channel.
The instances where they have chosen the same basis
are used for the key-generation process.
The instances where they have chosen different bases
are used to determine the performance of the channel.
For these instances, the measurement results
are, in fact, announced publicly and are
used in a Bell inequality to determine
how well the channel transmission has preserved
entanglement.
This allows Alice and Bob to have
an entanglement-based measurement
of the maximum amount of information
a potential eavesdropper could have obtained.
Alice and Bob then perform classical postprocessing
to erase any information an eavesdropper could have
discovered and to correct for remaining errors between Alice
and Bob.
That is how entanglement can be used
to establish encryption keys, to eliminate the need
to trust the system transmitter, and to check the security
of the encryption keys.
There are various other QKD protocols
with differing benefits and tradeoffs
that may be of interest in specific scenarios.
However, the important point is that they all
make use of the same basic ideas and concepts
that I have described here.
