
Let's now talk about entanglement,
Bell's inequality, and experiments
that can tell us something about the nature of reality.
In the particular example we use here,
we'll be talking about polarization entangled photons.
But these concepts have been demonstrated
in many different types of systems.
We'll start by talking about polarized single photons.
Say you have a vertically polarized photon, which
just means that the photons electric field is
oriented vertically, you can send it
through some polarization rotating element,
and then to a polarizing beam splitter, which
has single photon detectors on each output.
Right now we're not rotating the polarization.
And the way this polarizing beam splitter works
is if the photon is vertically polarized it will always
reflect off the beam splitter and be detected in this port.
But if the photon is horizontally polarized,
it will pass through the beam splitter
and be detected in that port.
So this idealized system makes a perfect measurement
of the photon polarization as long as it's polarized either
horizontally or vertically.
We call this making a measurement in the HV basis.
The photons can be polarized in other directions too.
For example, diagonally.
To measure in the diagonal basis,
we can rotate the polarization before it
gets to the beam splitter.
Then this detector will be associated
with the diagonally polarized photons.
And this one is associated with the anti-diagonally polarized
photons.
This is a measurement in the diagonal, or AD basis.
What happens if we take a photon that is vertically polarized
and measure it in the AD basis?
In that case, quantum mechanics predicts that it will randomly
go to one detector or the other and you can't know
in advance which will happen.
We've been talking about single photons,
but quantum theory predicts the existence of entanglement.
Here's a cartoon of an entangled photon source.
It puts out two photons.
We'll call them A and B, and each
goes in a different direction two researchers
named Alice and Bob.
The quantum state is shown here.
And what it means is that the source puts out
a state that is an equal superposition a photon A being
horizontally polarized and B being vertically polarized,
and photon A being vertically polarized
and B horizontally polarized.
When we make a measurement in the HV basis,
we find that if Alice measured an H Bob will always
measure a V, and vise versa.
So far this doesn't seem too weird.
And if Alice and Bob both make their measurements
in the same basis, what they measure
is consistent with a source just putting out
a classical correlated state, where half the time it
sends an H photon to Alice and a V photon
to Bob and half the time a V photon to Alice and a H photon
to Bob.
Now, let's rotate the measurement basis
so that both Alice and Bob measure in the AD basis.
Remember, if you have an H photon
and measure it in the AD basis, it
will randomly go to one detector or the other with 50%
probability.
Same with a V photon.
If we really did start out with a classical state,
then we'd expect that Alice and Bob's detector clicks
would be totally uncorrelated when they
measure in the diagonal basis.
On the contrary, countless experiments
have verified that the detector clicks are always
anti-correlated if Alice and Bob measure in the same basis.
These are the stronger than classical correlations
that Einstein called spooky action at a distance.
But there's another interpretation that's possible.
It could be that the photons have some hidden variable
that's telling them to go to one or the other detector
when they're measured in this or that basis.
You can loosely phrase the question
of which of these alternatives is correct.
Is the world quantum or is it classical and deterministic?
It's kind of amazing that there's actually an experiment
that you can do to rule out one of these possibilities.
More precisely, we can rule out something called local realism.
The local part just says that you can't send out information
faster than the speed of light.
And realism means that things have definite properties that
exist independently of whether or not
we choose to measure them.
This is, I think, how most of us see the world.
Hidden variables is an example of a local realistic theory.
The experiment involves doing the same measurements
of polarization, but changing the measurement basis
that Alice and Bob use.
In the simplest form of the experiment,
Alice and Bob each measure in two basis.
It turns out that for some selection of their measurement
basis, there's a correlation function you can define
over the inputs, or basis selection, and the outputs,
or which detector clicks, where the value of the correlation
function is different if the photons have
these hidden variables versus what
quantum mechanics predicts.
Now, there are some loopholes associated with these tests
of local realism.
The loopholes are ways in which nature could trick us
into thinking local realism is incorrect when in fact, it's
not.
First, we need to make sure that Alice doesn't
know in advance what measurement basis Bob will pick and vice
versa.
If one of them knew the basis that the other chose,
they could trivially reproduce the statistics.
The only way to guarantee this is
to make sure that their basis selections are space-like
separated, so there's no time for the information about which
basis Alice chose to make it over to Bob before he
needs to choose a basis.
There's also the free choice loophole,
which says the basis selections on either side
need to be uncorrelated with any classical variable.
In other words, Alice and Bob's basis selections
need to be made of their own free will
without being affected by anything else.
Finally, there's the detection loophole,
which says we need to measure enough of the photon pairs
to make sure we're not only observing a subset, which
appears to violate Bell's inequality.
The first experimental test of Bell's inequality
was done in the '80s.
And for a long time after that people
tried to close these loopholes.
People managed to close all the loopholes separately,
but it wasn't until 2015 that experimentalists
were able to conclusively close the loopholes
in a single experiment.
This was a tremendous accomplishment.
And it implies that the world we live in is inherently random.
By the way, if you're the type of person
who doesn't like the idea of the world being random,
I should note that no experiment can ever rule out
the concept of super determinism, which
is the idea that everything in the universe,
including Alice and Bob's basis selection, is predetermined.
So you can say that these experiments are still
consistent with super determinism,
but you might also have to accept
the fact that you don't have any free will in that case.
