- Quantum mechanics provides a means
to enhance information security
by encoding information in quantum mechanical systems,
for example qubits.
And then distributing those qubits
from point A to point B.
But how is this done in practice?
This week we'll introduce quantum communication protocols
and how they're implemented using single
and entangled photons.
To get started, before talking about photons,
let's first talk about light in general.
Light is an example of an electromagnetic field
and electromagnetic fields are responsible
for the many phenomena we commonly associate
with electricity and magnetism.
For example, it's what causes electricity
to flow through a wire,
and it's what makes bar magnets
attract or repel one another.
And when whether propagating in a material
or in an empty space,
the electromagnetic field is a wave that oscillates
at a given frequency.
And these oscillations are what we call light.
Now fundamentally the electromagnetic field
is quantum mechanical
and so light, as with all quantum mechanical systems,
is quantized into discrete quanta called photons.
The fact that light could be described
as both a particle and a wave
is what's known in quantum mechanics
as wave particle duality.
And this is why we can talk about
discrete particle-like photons
having a particular frequency or a wavelength
which are both wave-like properties.
Now like any wave a photon will oscillate
with a given frequency and in a particular direction.
So let's take those one at a time.
In the vernacular use of the word,
light is generally part
of the visible electromagnetic spectrum,
the part which we can see,
with different colors being different frequencies of light.
But more generally, light as we're using the term here,
and its associated photons, can exist at any frequency.
From the radio frequencies used in radio communication bands
to microwaves and terahertz, infrared, visible,
ultraviolet light, and on up through x-rays
and even gamma rays.
Photons are the quanta of light
across this entire electromagnetic spectrum.
Now in addition to frequency,
an electromagnetic wave oscillates
in a particular direction.
This is called polarization
and it generally refers to the direction
that the electric field is oscillating.
Once that's established, Maxwell's equations
determine the direction of the magnetic field as well.
So the direction a photon's electric field oscillates
is called its polarization.
And when a photon travels through space
its electric field can oscillate up and down,
it can oscillate side to side,
and it can even oscillate
in an arbitrary, complex super-position
of these two directions.
And I'm saying super-position here deliberately.
Horizontal and vertical photon polarizations
are orthogonal quantum states.
So we can put these polarization states, H and V,
on the poles of a block sphere
and treat them as qubit states, zero and one.
Similarly, on the equator of the block sphere,
the X axis corresponds to diagonal
and anti-diagonal linear polarized light, H plus or minus V.
And as one goes from the north to the south pole
along the X-Z plane,
the polarization remains linear
and rotates from horizontal at the north pole
to diagonal at plus X,
to vertical at the south pole,
anti-diagonal at minus X,
and back to horizontal again at the north pole.
Now, the Y axis corresponds
to right and left circularly polarized light.
Circular polarization results
from having a complex coefficient,
such as H plus or minus I times V.
And so, the polarization rotates in time
as the photon propagates.
Elsewhere on the surface of the block sphere,
the polarization is neither purely linear
nor purely circular,
but instead is generally elliptical.
And one can think of the linearly and circularly
polarized light as just special cases
of a distorted ellipse.
And, note that in optics,
they give the sphere a different name.
They call this a Poincare Sphere.
And their convention is to swap the Y and Z axes
so that circularly polarized light is at the poles
and linearly polarized light is on the equator.
In any case, we'll use the block convention here.
The electromagnetic field is quantized into photons
and the polarization of a single photon
can be used as a qubit
with horizontal and vertical polarization
at the north and south poles.
Now, we generally don't encounter
pure, single photon states in everyday life.
First, there are typically on average
many more than a single photon from a given source.
For example, the light coming from
your computer screen right now
contains many many billions of photons,
each with some arbitrary polarization.
And second, such classical light sources
are generally statistical combinations or mixtures
of many different photon number states.
To implement QKD protocols
based on single photon polarization,
we need to find a way to generate single photons
with a specific polarization state.
To begin with, a pure quantum state of n photons
is called a Fock State.
And it's state with exactly n photons.
And what we would like to do here
is generate a one photon Fock State.
Fock States are called non-classical states of light
because they generally don't exist
in the classical world around us.
At least, not on their own.
However, there is a form of classical light
called a Coherent State,
which comprises an infinite superposition of Fock States.
Lasers and microwave oscillators,
for example, create this type of light.
While a photon Fock State contains a specific
number of photons,
a coherent state has a probabilistic
distribution of photon numbers.
For a given coherent state alpha,
the probability of measuring n photons
is given by a Poisson Distribution
centered around some average number of photons,
the magnitude of alpha squared.
This means that a Coherent State will always
have some probability of being in a one photon Fock State.
But its presence is stochastic
and very unlikely when the average photon number
is much larger than one.
Now, a quick and dirty way to produce a single photon
is to simply attenuate a coherent source.
If we pass laser light
through an extremely opaque filter,
the average photon number decreases
and the beam gets dimmer.
As the average photon number decreases,
our Poisson Distribution shifts
and the probability of measuring
a low photon number Fock State increases.
To make this concrete,
imagine we attenuate a laser light
until the average photon number is only 0.1.
Plugging this into our formula
for the probability of measuring n photons,
we find that 90% of the time
we'll measure zero photons.
Nine percent of the time, we'll measure one photon.
And only one percent of the time
will we measure more than one photon.
So, with light attenuated to this degree,
we can say with reasonably high confidence
that if we have a photon,
it's very likely to be in
a single photon state that we need.
And there's only a one percent chance
that it's a multi-photon Fock State.
However, while attenuation is by far
the simplest way to produce a single photon,
this procedure is far from ideal.
After attenuation, our light is still in a Coherent State,
not the pure single photon Fock State that we really want.
And moreover, while we exceededed increasing the probability
of measuring only one photon,
this came at the expense of lowering the probability
of measuring any photons at all.
In the above example,
nine out of ten times there was no photon.
And as we further lower the average photon number,
we'll certainly decrease the chance
of getting any multi-photon states
but at the same time,
we dramatically increase the likelihood
that we obtained no photons at all.
Thus, the rate at which we obtain single photons goes down
and this translates to a lower communication rate.
A far better scheme for single photon generation
relies on an intermediary quantum system,
such as an optically active quantum dot.
As we saw in course one,
a quantum dot has a ladder of quantized energy levels.
Each pair is separated by a unique energy splitting.
And transitions between energy levels
is generally associated with the absorption or emission
of a single photon.
The idea is to drive the quantum dot
to a higher excited state
and then let natural spontaneous emission occur.
The quantum dot relaxes back into its ground state,
emitting photons at frequencies
corresponding to the energy level spacings
of its transitions.
Importantly, the final transition
from the first excited state to the ground state
is generally unique and emits a photon
at a specific frequency.
If we filter the photon emission
from the quantum dot,
we can block all frequencies of light
except the frequency of this final single photon.
This final single photon passes through our filter
creating exactly the single photon source we need.
Although the relaxation process
is also stochastic in time,
the timing jitter of the single photon emission
can be minimized to the extent to the dot relaxes quickly.
And in more sophisticated sources,
the emission process may even be mediated
by a clocked pulse
to obtain a heralded stream of single photons.
We can then pass these photons through a polarizing filter
and prepare the polarization corresponding
to the qubit state we need for our QKD protocol.
Now, in addition to a source of single photons,
we also need a device that can detect single photons
at the other end of the communication channel.
The challenge here is to convert the small amount
of energy stored in a single photon
into a measurable electrical signal.
A common example of a single photon detector
is a geiger mode avalanche photodiode.
Essentially, a semi-conducting material
such as silicon with a large external voltage
applied across it.
When a photon hits the detector,
its energy is sufficient to dislodge an electron
from the semi-conducting material.
The external voltage then accelerates this electron
through the bulk semi-conductor
colliding and dislodging more and more electrons,
creating an avalanche effect.
This cascade of dislodged charges generates a large
measurable electrical current,
which indicates that a photon was absorbed.
Other examples of single photon detectors
include photo multiplier tubes,
superconducting nanowires,
and superconducting transition edge sensors.
In generating or detecting single photons,
it's desirable that these processes
be performed with high quantum efficiency.
For example, a photon is generated on each clock cycle,
or every photon that's generated is detected without loss.
And in the coming week, we'll see how
the source and detector quantum efficiencies
come into play when implementing
quantum key distribution protocols.