MICHELE MOSCA: Cryptography is the art
of using mathematical tools to achieve information security
while using untrusted channels, like the internet or wireless
communication.
It's what we use to confirm that the software we download
every day by auto-updates came from a legitimate source
and wasn't tampered with.
It's what we use to know an online shopping or banking
page is authentic.
Public key signatures are one of the most commonly used methods
to provide authentication and data integrity guarantees.
Most of the encryption we use today
to protect the confidentiality of information
is symmetric key encryption.
However, how are these symmetric keys established?
In a typical transaction, you might use a public key signature
to authenticate your bank, then public key encryption
to establish a symmetric key, and then AES
to encrypt your confidential information.
However, quantum computers will break the mathematical problems
at the core of virtually all public key cryptographic schemes
in use today, namely integer factorization
and the discrete logarithm problem.
This means RSA and Diffie-Hellman
schemes are decimated.
Going to larger keys adds very little extra security
against quantum attacks.
Quantum computers also wicking symmetric cryptography
because they can brute force search quadratically faster.
That is, a quantum computer can effectively
search a space of N keys with only square root n quantum
steps.
Doubling key lengths can effectively
mitigate the known quantum attacks
against symmetric cryptography.
Now while acronyms like RSA and ECC
might not mean much to most users of technology,
these tools underpin the security
of tools such as secure web browsing, VPNs, secure email,
auto-updates, blockchains, and so on,
which are the basis of technological infrastructure,
including the internet, cloud computing, IoT, and so on.
So to reap the benefits of quantum computing,
it is imperative that we first deploy
the new cryptographic tools designed to be
safe against quantum attacks.
This is sometimes called quantum-safe cryptography
or post-quantum cryptography.
Now we don't believe that quantum computers
capable of breaking RSA and Diffie-Hellman schemes in use
today exist, but this doesn't mean
we can just wait and see before doing something about it.
Whether we need to take action now depends on three parameters.
Firstly, what is the security shelf life of the information
your system is supposed to protect?
Call this x years.
Secondly, how long will it take to migrate your systems
to ones designed to be secure against quantum attacks?
Let y be the migration time.
And lastly, what is the collapse time?
The time until your threat actors
are able to use quantum computers to attack your systems
and compromise your information.
Now note that for the next y years,
you're stuck with the quantum-vulnerable tools,
so information being recorded during this period
may be exploited by quantum computers in the future.
This information is supposed to be protected
for another x years; however, if x plus y is bigger than z,
or z, then you won't be providing
the x years of confidentiality that you're supposed to.
For example, information may be for sale on the dark web
while it is still supposed to be confidential.
Suppose your information is supposed
to remain secure for 10 years after transmission,
and it takes 10 years before the systems
protect those transmissions against quantum attacks.
If quantum computers capable of decrypting that information are
available in 15 years, then there will be a five-year period
where those transmissions will be vulnerable to compromise
before their 10-year shelf life is up.
Further, if y is bigger than z, then systems
collapse with no reliable way to rebuild them.
That is, there is no effective remediation
because the tools to protect against new attacks
are simply not available.
Also, it's important to note that rushing y
will not only be disruptive and expensive,
but will lead to flawed and vulnerable implementations.
While viable candidates exist, there's
a long road to wide-scale, practical, robust deployment,
including many challenges.
We need to identify candidates.
We need to scrutinize them against quantum
and classical attacks.
Protocols using the tools must also be secure.
Software and hardware implementations
need to be secure.
We need to analyze the side channels and design
countermeasures.
We need to look at the performance requirements.
We have to integrate them into tools and applications.
We have to worry about migration and compatibility.
Standardization so systems will interoperate.
And validation and certification.
It can easily take 10 to 20 years
to properly migrate existing systems.
In August 2015, the National Security Agency
of the United States announced that it
will initiate a transition to quantum-resistant algorithms
in the not-too-distant future.
This sent a very clear signal to the world
that quantum computing was something that needed
to be taken seriously now.
Shortly after, the National Institute
of Standards and Technology, NIST,
started outlining its plans to move forward and produce
standardized post-quantum algorithms.
It launched its post-quantum cryptography project,
which is a process to solicit, evaluate, and standardize
one or more quantum-resistant public key cryptographic
algorithms.
The submission deadline for proposed post-quantum algorithms
was November 30, 2017, and the first workshop
to review the submissions was held in April 2018.
Most submissions are based on the hardness-of-lattice
problems, or for signatures, there
is also schemes based on the security of hash functions.
Other standard bodies around the world
are also studying this challenge taking steps
to prepare the wide range of standards needed
to protect our information technologies from quantum
attacks.
For example, standards for how the financial industry
will use the new algorithms.
This need to upgrade our cryptographic systems might
seem like a nuisance.
However, there may be an additional positive impact.
This very advanced warning of the systemic threat to our cyber
systems not only gives us a chance
to prepare our defenses against this threat,
but, if done properly, as part of lifecycle management
and not as crisis management, we can
rebuild the foundations of cybersecurity
to be stronger than ever before.
We can have a stronger and more agile
cyber-immune system capable of protecting, detecting,
and responding to new unexpected threats.
