
Last week, we introduced the basics of modern cryptography
schemes with a focus on public key encryption based
on one-way mathematical functions.
We discussed the RSA cryptosystem in detail
and showed that its security is based
on prime number factorization and the related
problem of period finding.
Period finding is a hard problem for a classical computer.
And we showed how it could be efficiently
performed on a universal quantum computer running
Shor's algorithm.
We also discussed the topic of key distribution,
namely the conundrum that arises when using symmetric keys
for encryption and decryption.
How can we securely exchange symmetric keys
when we don't yet have the encryption
keys in our possession for the first transmission?
The answer was to use public key encryption
based on asymmetric keys, like the RSA cryptosystem.
However, as we just noted, RSA is
vulnerable to attack by a quantum computer running
Shor's algorithm.
But where quantum figuratively closes one door,
it can also open another.
This week, we'll show that quantum mechanics not only
gives us the tools to compromise secure communication protocols,
it also provides the resources to enhance secure communication
through the use of quantum key distribution or QKD.
In course one, we briefly discussed QKD in the context
of a one-time pad--
that is, distributing symmetric keys continuously
to provide fresh secure keys that can then be used
continually to encrypt data.
Here, we'll introduce two general classes of QKD.
One is based on single photon sources and detectors.
And the other is based on entangled photons and Bell
state measurements.
Both rely on many of the quantum concepts
you learned in course one, such as entanglement,
projective measurement, and the no-cloning theorem.
This week, we'll expand on those concepts.
We'll also discuss the importance of randomness
in implementing QKD.
Pseudo random number generators output sequences of numbers
with properties that are approximately random.
But because it's based on an algorithm that
uses an initial value, called a seed,
the sequences are never truly random.
This has implication for cryptography schemes,
since ideally a current bitstream should not in any way
be predictable from the previous bitstream.
On the other hand, the randomness
of projective measurement is believed to be truly random.
And this concept, in conjunction with distributed entanglement,
is a foundation for quantum random number generators.
