
I'm going to talk about random numbers.
This is a fascinating topic because random numbers are not
only really useful in everyday life,
but thinking about random number generators
also brings up some interesting questions about reality
and free will.
Let's start out talking about why random numbers are
so important.
If you were a kid in the 80s, you
might remember a game show called Press Your Luck.
Part of the game show had a box moving around different squares
on a board that were also changing,
and the player would press a button
to stop the motion of the box.
Whatever square the box was on would
be what the player would win, or they could land on a whammy
and lose everything.
In 1984, this guy named Michael Larson went on the show,
and he did really well.
What you can notice is that he really pays a lot of attention,
almost like he knows when to press the button.
And in fact, he did because the people
that made this game did a really bad job randomizing the motion
of the box and the squares.
In fact, they weren't random at all,
but just randomly picked from a small number
of possible sequences.
So Michael Larson spent a lot of time
with a VCR watching and memorizing
the various, quote unquote, random sequences that
would come up.
He ended up setting a record by winning over $100,000, which
I'm sure had consequences for the people who ran the game
show.
So that's one way random numbers can influence someone's life.
Here's another more serious one.
As you know, the security of many forms of encryption
rely on the computational difficulty
of solving certain problems.
For example, factoring is difficult
with a classical computer, so some types of encryption
are based on the difficulty of factoring,
and you can have an encryption key
that's the product of two large prime numbers.
If one of the prime numbers is reused in another encryption
key, that breaks the security of the algorithm.
Now, this shouldn't be a problem because if prime numbers are
selected randomly, the probability
of two keys using the same prime should basically be zero.
But in 2012, researchers found that, in fact,
if they looked at all the publicly accessible keys
for RSA, a commonly used public key cryptosystem,
about a quarter of a percent of the time, two unrelated keys
shared a prime factor.
The authors speculate that lack of entropy or randomness in one
of the inputs to the algorithm resulted
in this repeat of factors, which essentially made those systems
completely insecure.
Beyond public key encryption, there
are many other cryptographic tasks
that require randomness, such as challenge response protocols,
like what you use at an ATM or digital signatures.
Modern day cryptography relies on random numbers,
and they're also important for scientific applications,
like for Monte Carlo simulations and for lotteries.
Now let's look more closely at what a Random Number Generator
or RNG actually is.
For now, we're going to keep the discussion abstract
and just imagine that an RNG is a black box.
And when we press a button, a one or a zero comes out.
And to keep the discussion simple,
we'll assume that they are identically distributed.
So half the time it's a zero, half the time it's a one.
If the black box is truly an RNG,
there's no way of knowing what will come out
when you press the button, and we
can say that each bit coming out has one bit of entropy, which
is a measure of randomness.
Now it's not just that you or I with our limited knowledge
have no way of knowing what comes out.
It's that nobody, not even somebody with knowledge
of everything in the universe, an infinite computational
power, can predict it.
One problem is that it's really hard
to tell when something is actually random
or when it's just that you can't predict it.
For example, pseudorandom number generators
are often used in practice.
With a pseudorandom number generator,
you put in a random seed, and what you get out
is a lot of numbers that look random.
But a pseudorandom number generator
is a classical deterministic algorithm,
so of course, it's not random at all.
This quote by John Von Neumann puts it nicely.
"Anyone who considers arithmetical methods
of producing random digits is, of course, in a state of sin."
Because they're not really random,
pseudorandom number generators are
susceptible to algorithmic and computational advances,
and they require that the input seed is random and secret.
OK, so if we can't use a classical computer
to make random numbers, how about
if we take a physical process that we know
is random and use that to make our random numbers.
So flip a coin and say heads is zero and tails is one.
That's kind of a slow random number generator,
but people have built much faster generators using
ring oscillators, a single photon hitting a beam splitter,
and even images of a lava lamp.
Many of these things should be random.
For example with a single photon hitting a perfect 50/50 beam
splitter, which arm you detect the photon in should be random,
but it's hard to verify that everything is working
the way you think it is.
People have demonstrated the ability to blind detectors
or force them to click for example.
Here's an example of adversarial control of an RNG demonstrated
by two researchers in 2009.
They showed that by injecting noise onto a power supply,
they could compromise the randomness of a ring
oscillator based RNG of the same type used in challenge response
protocols for chip and pin credit card authorization.
Here's a visual representation of the RNG
output from their paper.
Before they launched their attack, it looks random,
and after, there are patterns.
Looking at this, you might say, OK,
that just means that we should look for patterns.
Indeed, there are many statistical tests
that will look for patterns and quantify the likelihood
that a sequence of long numbers is consistent with being
generated by a random process.
The problem is that it only looks for specific patterns,
and there are plenty of things that don't have any patterns
but are not random--
the digits of pi, for instance.
So we can't just take the output of the RNG
and run statistical tests on it to say whether or not
it's really an RNG.
Another thing we can try instead is to open up the box,
look what's inside, characterize it, and make
sure everything's working OK.
The problem with that is that systems
can be complicated and messy, there
are lots of ways that components can fail or be compromised,
so there's no way of knowing whether or not you're
testing for the right things.
In 2010, some researchers realized
that you can build something really close to a black box
random number generator.
It turns out that you can make an RNG based on a loophole
free test of Bell's inequality and
under some general assumptions, you
can quantify the entropy of your RNG
without knowing the details of how everything inside the box
is working.
