
So far this week we've introduced single photon
sources and detectors and seen how single photons can
be used to encode and transfer quantum information
across a communication channel, for example, to distribute
a cryptographic key.
In this section, we'll discuss the generation
in detection of entangled pairs of photons.
And later this week, we'll learn how entangled photons may also
be used for quantum key distribution,
as well as for quantum teleportation and random number
generation.
As we saw in Course 1, an entangled state is a manifestly
quantum mechanical multi-qubit state that cannot be written
as a product of single qubit states in any basis.
Let's start with a counter-example.
We've seen through of Course 1 and Course 2
that if we apply Hadamard gates to 2 qubits,
each prepared in state zero, then
we obtain the 2 qubit equal superposition state, 0, 0
plus 0, 1 plus 1, 0, plus 1, 1.
Now, while it might appear that this state can't be factored
into single qubit states, we know
that it must be possible because we generated it by applying
Hadamards to single qubits.
And as we've seen, this state is the tensor product
of the single qubit superposition state 0 plus 1.
Thus, it's not an entangled state,
because we can write it in terms of the single qubit states; 0
plus 1 for qubit A, tensor product 0 plus 1 for qubit B.
In fact, 0 plus or minus 1 are the excited and ground states
along the x-axis of the block sphere.
Thus, we can write this as the plus and minus state
in the x spaces.
In contrast, we can see that the state 0, 0 plus 1,
1 cannot be written as a tensor product of single qubit states.
And it's an entangled state of 2 qubits called a Bell state.
And even when we perform a transformation to the x basis,
we still get a state that can't be factored into single qubit
states A, tensor product B.
This is a property of entangled states.
They remain untangled even in different bases.
And looking at the circuit model,
we see that we needed a conditional 2 qubit gate
to generate the entanglement.
Single qubit gates alone were not enough.
We'll return to Bell states in a moment.
Now, recall from earlier this week
that single photons have a polarization, for example,
horizontal and vertical.
And since vertical and horizontal polarizations
are orthogonal quantum states, we
choose to put them at the poles of the block sphere
and call this our qubit.
For single photon QKD protocols, like BB84, this is sufficient.
Bob preparers a single photon in a particular qubit state, that
is a particular polarization state,
and then sends it along the communication channel to Alice.
However, as we'll see in the next couple of videos, using
entangled photons enables certain alternative types
of QKD protocols, as well as a means
to generate random numbers in teleport quantum information.
And so the question is, how do we generate and detect
entangled photons?
The most common method for producing entangled photons
is through a process called spontaneous parametric
downconversion.
Parametric downconversion is essentially a frequency
conversion process, where a photon at frequency 2f
is converted into two individual photons whose frequencies
together add to 2f and conserve energy,
for example, each photon having a frequency, f.
Now, linear time invariant systems, by definition,
do not convert frequencies.
That is if we take a sine wave and pass it
through a linear system, its amplitude and phase may change,
but its frequency remains the same.
This is essentially a statement that a plane wave
e to the i omega t is an eigenfunction
of a linear system.
Thus, to take a photon at one frequency
and convert into two photons at a different frequency,
we need a material with strong non-linear optical properties.
And a common example of such a crystal
is beta barium borate, or BBO.
When a strong pump beam passes through a BBO crystal,
there's a small probability that one of its photons
will convert into two photons, one
called a signal and the other called an idler.
This is just convention.
Now, due to energy conservation, the signal and idler
frequencies are each half of the pump frequency.
And due to momentum conservation,
the signal and idler photons will
leave the crystal in correlated spatial directions.
Additionally, these two photons will also
have correlated polarizations.
Depending on the type of crystal we
use, the two downconverted photons will either
have the same polarization, which we call a Type 1 Crystal,
or they have opposite polarizations
from a type 2 Crystal.
BBO is a Type 2 Crystal, and we see
that the two downconverted photons exit
the crystal in directions that form a cone, one having
horizontal polarization and one having vertical polarization.
The locations of the photons on the cones
are correlated, equidistant from the original beam
trajectory, again, due to momentum conservation.
For example, the colored dots on the polarization cones
indicate the correlated spatial positions
of the emitted photons.
Now, crucially for the two photons to be polarization
entangled, their direction of emission cannot indicate which
photon is vertically polarized and which is horizontally
polarized.
Therefore, we use an iris to selectively keep
only photons that arise from positions where the two
polarization cones cross.
Thus, whether the signal and idler photons
travel left or right once they exit the crystal,
one will have polarization h and the other polarization v. But
which is which is not known.
In other words, the direction of propagation
does not label the polarization.
Under these conditions, the state of the two
downconverted photons is polarization entangled
and it's all of the form H, V plus e to i phi V, H.
The phase phi can be made 0 degrees
by choosing the correct phase matching
conditions, crystal thickness, et cetera,
or using a phase shifter.
Thus, one has the state H, V plus V,
H. This is one of the four Bell states.
And from this, the other Bell states
can be generated by changing the phase phi
and swapping the polarizations H and V, using a half wave plate.
Now that we're able to generate all four entangled Bell states,
let's see how to detect these states.
We first need to introduce an optical device called
a polarization beam splitter.
A polarization beam splitter will transmit or reflect
a photon depending on its polarization, H or V.
And at each output of the beam splitter
is a single photon detector.
By seeing which detector clicks, we
can determine whether the photon had horizontal
or vertical polarization.
To see how this works, let's try a test case.
We begin with a photon polarized in the vertical direction.
We also show here for completeness a polarization
rotator, a device that changes the polarization
of incoming photons.
For now, however, we just set it so that it passes photons
without making any changes.
Now, if we send in a vertically polarized photon,
it reflects off the polarization beam splitter,
and it's detected by the single photon
detector in the reflection arm.
On the other hand, if we send in a horizontally polarized
photon, it's transmitted by the polarization beam splitter
and detected using the single photon detector
in the transmission arm.
Thus, we can determine the photon polarization
by seeing which detector clicks.
So, what happens if we have entangled photons?
Let's take the H, V plus V, H entangled state.
Photon A travels to the left polarization beam splitter
and Photon B travels to the right polarization
being splitter.
And what we'll observe are correlated detection events.
That is if Photon A's polarization analyzer indicates
horizontal polarization, then the Photon B analyzer indicates
vertical polarization.
Similarly, if Photon A is measured
to have a vertical polarization, then Photon B
must have horizontal polarization.
These are correlated detection events.
Now, the presence of correlation suggests
polarization entanglement, but it's not proof of entanglement.
After all, our source may just randomly send out
classical states of either H, V or V,
H, which would give the same results,
but it's not an entangled quantum state H, V plus V, H.
To test for entanglement, one needs
to measure the entanglement in different polarization bases.
As we saw earlier, changing the bases
does not change the entanglement.
And so the measured correlations will be retained
in any measurement basis.
In practice, rather than changing the measurement
hardware, one may instead rotate the polarization
of the input state.
This is experimentally more straightforward,
and this is the role of the polarization rotator.
With correlation measurements made in different polarization
bases, one can compare the measured results
with the classical probability model assuming
there's no entanglement.
This type of test is called a Bell's inequality test.
And it's used to determine the degree of entanglement
of a quantum state within certain assumptions, called
loopholes.
You'll learn more about Bell state measurements,
test the Bell's inequality and loopholes
later in the week, as well as the application of Bell state
measurements to the problem of random number generation.
