
Ordinary classical information-- everybody
understands that because it surrounds us.
It's like the information in a book.
You can copy it at will, and it's not
disturbed by reading it.
But what is quantum information?
Rather than give a mathematical description,
I try to find a metaphor for it.
It's rather like the information in a dream.
If you try to describe your dream to someone,
your memory of it changes, and eventually you forget the dream
and you only remember what you said about it.
You can't prove to someone else what you dreamed,
and you can lie about your dream without getting caught.
But there is no really hard science of dreams,
despite the effort of Sigmund Freud.
And unlike dreams, there is a good mathematical theory
of quantum information.
Indeed, when you develop it, you'll
see where classical information comes from,
that we used to think was just simply information.
Well, here are some examples of elementary quantum behavior.
We can use single photons of light
to carry one bit of information each
because a horizontal photon, as at the top of the figure,
can be reliably distinguished from vertical photon,
as in the middle.
And if you pass them through a calcite crystal like that,
or crystal of any other sufficiently un-symmetric
material, the horizontal photons will get passed straight
through and the vertical ones will get deviated
by some amount.
And therefore, you can count them in two separate detectors.
And that means each photon can carry
one reliable bit of classical information,
but if you put in photons at some other angle,
instead of being deviated by an intermediate amount,
as you might expect, they behave probabilistically.
Some of them go into the upper beam and become horizontal,
and the others go into the lower beam and become vertical.
This is, you might say, one of the central mysteries
of quantum mechanics, the random behavior of things
that are individually identically prepared.
This means that I can use vertical and horizontal photons
to send one bit per photon of message,
but if I put in diagonal photons,
well, simply by rotating the apparatus,
I can distinguish a left diagonal from a right diagonal,
like a slash from a backslash.
But once that rotated apparatus is used,
that thing cannot distinguish the vertical from
the horizontal.
So we have four separate states of the photons
that are, pairwise, perfectly distinguishable.
But you can't distinguish all four kinds.
Now I want to get you to worry a little bit
about this strange behavior.
And my colleague, Bill Wootters, who's
a physics professor at Williams College,
has a pedagogic analog for the behavior of quantum systems
when they're measured.
He says it's really like one of those old fashioned 19th
century British schools where the students, who are not
supposed to ask any questions-- they were just supposed
to respond to the questions the teacher posed,
and here the student is the photon and the teacher
is the measuring apparatus.
So the strict teacher is asking the student
a question, saying, is your polarization
vertical or horizontal?
And the students start saying, I'm
polarized about 56, 55 degrees.
I believe I asked you a question.
Are you vertical or horizontal?
Oh, horizontal, sir.
Did you ever have any other polarization?
No, sir, I was always horizontal.
So that is the way quantum systems behave when measured,
and that's what lies behind many of the interesting things you
can do with it.
And ultimately, when we come to entanglement,
we can understand where that behavior comes from.
Well, now, we'll talk about how we put it to use.
This is the quantum money that was
proposed by Wiesner in 1968.
He says, a piece of quantum money
will have a serial number on it like ordinary money,
but it also will have 20 perfectly reflective boxes,
each containing a single photon of one of those four states.
And the bank will have a record based
on the serial number of which photon is in which box,
which kind of photon, and when you bring the money back
to the bank, the bank will open the boxes, one by one,
and measure each photon in the way
that it would behave reliably, and therefore
check that they all agree with what was supposed
to be stored there.
But if you don't know what's stored there,
you will disturb some of them by measuring them the wrong way,
and the chance of passing a fake bill
or making a copy that passes is 3/4 to the 20th power, which
is small.
Now, this is the idea that Gilles Brassard and I used
in our building the quantum cryptography apparatus where
we don't try to store the photons,
but we send them over a short distance, which in this case
was only about 30 centimeters.
And the idea is that any eavesdropper
in that middle empty section of the apparatus
would spoil the sum of the transmitted photons
by measuring the wrong way, and therefore,
would betray their presence.
So in more detail, the way quantum
key distribution works is that you have two parties.
We call them Alice and Bob.
Alice sends a stream of polar ice photons of those four kinds
to Bob.
The Eve is the nickname for the eavesdropper.
She can try to measure those photons if she wants,
but if she does, she will introduce errors
with high probability.
And the other thing we allow her to do
is to listen to the entire classical discussion
between Alice and Bob.
And that takes place through a series
of ordinary classical messages exchanged
over a public channel.
And when they're done with all this,
they end up each with a shared secret key,
in other words, a random string that they both know
and they have high confidence that no one else knows.
Well, that is the case if there isn't too much eavesdropping,
or there's no eavesdropping, but if there's
a lot of eavesdropping, they will detect a lot of errors
and their effort to distill this key will have failed.
But they will know that it has failed with high probability.
And they just try again tomorrow.
So in more detail, here's how the protocol works,
which is called BB84 after the names of the author
and the year that it came out.
Alice, in the first line, sends a random sequence
of these four kinds of photons.
Bob, at the other side, makes random measurements, uncorrelated.
He doesn't know what Alice would send,
and he just chooses randomly whether to make
a rectilinear measurement that is vertical versus horizontal,
or a diagonal measurement.
So he does, and then in the third line,
we get his measurement results.
And I'm including the realistic effect that some of the photons
may get lost, or his detectors may not be perfectly efficient.
So in some cases, he doesn't get anything.
For example, in the first case Alice sent a vertical photon.
He chose to make a rectilinear measurement
and he gets a result which is vertical, which is correct.
In the second case, Alice sent a horizontal photon,
but he decided to make a diagonal measurement
and he gets a random one of the two diagonal results.
But he doesn't know that it's bad.
It's a 45-degree photon, and so on for the others.
The next stage of the protocol now
is, after he's received them, Bob
tells Alice which kind of measurement he did.
He said, I measured the first one rectilinearly,
the second one diagonally, the third and fourth one
rectilinearly, the fifth one I didn't get, and so on.
That's indicated by the classical message
in quotation marks.
And then Alice tells him in which
cases he did the right thing, that is, he
made a measurement that didn't spoil the polarization that she
sent.
She very carefully doesn't say whether she
said vertical or horizontal, but she says in the first case
you made a rectilinear measurement and that was good.
Keep that photon.
Don't tell me what it was, of course, because somebody
might be listening.
In the second case, too bad, you made a diagonal measurement.
I sent a rectilinear photon, and so on.
So they cull from the photons that Bob received,
the ones that he spoiled.
And you can identify, say, a vertical photon is a 1,
a horizontal is 0, or for the diagonal photons,
they choose to identify the 45 degree as a 0,
and the 135 is a 1.
So what they have, essentially, at this stage
is a bunch of bit values that they
ought to agree about if there has been no eavesdropping.
So the next question is to find out
whether there's been eavesdropping,
and you can do that various ways,
but the most economical way that doesn't involve giving away
a lot of the data is for Alice to choose
a random subset of the bit positions,
and announce the parity of that random subset.
And in the first case, she chose this collection outlined
in red, and it has odd parity.
She says that it's odd.
And then the second one, she chooses
a different random subset and says that's even,
and they go on for maybe 20 of these random subsets.
And if they agree about all of them,
then the chance that there's even one
mistake in their sequence is about one in a million.
So they're pretty happy with that.
And of course, they have to throw away some of the photons
to compensate for the fact that they've
leaked 20 bits of information to the eavesdropper.
So that's the elementary version of the BB84 protocol.
