
Bell's inequality may seem just like an interesting experiment
you can do and something to learn about
in your first quantum course, but not something that has
any real world applications.
However in 2010, researchers show
that you can take the base machinery for demonstrating
Bell's inequality and use it to make
a remarkable type of quantum random number generator--
one that is certified by the violation of Bell's inequality
under some basic assumptions.
They showed that they could use the violation
of Bell's inequality to bound the entropy
of the outputs of their RNG.
Here's how it works.
Alice and Bob start out with a string of zeros and ones
that is used to select one measurement basis or the other.
Each time they run the experiment choosing
one basis or the other, each gets out a 0 or 1,
depending on which detector clicked.
They repeat the experiment many times
and use the input and output strings
to compute the Bell inequality function.
This tells them how much entropy is in the output string,
and they can then use classical techniques
to extract the randomness.
The amazing thing here is that all
you need to know to know how much entropy is in the system
is the violation of Bell's inequality.
So there's no need to continuously characterize
each and every component in your system
to make sure it's working properly.
You have one number that you get out
of your system that tells you if it's working properly.
Again, something can always break,
and this doesn't guarantee that nothing will go wrong
in your black box.
But if something goes wrong, either because something broke
or because an adversary is hacking the system,
you see it reflected in the violation of Bell's inequality.
This concept is called device independence or black box
security.
We've talked here about using this for random number
generation, but people have demonstrated black box security
proofs for other applications, such as
quantum key distribution.
In these protocols, it's important to close
the loopholes in Bell's inequality,
because those could provide a way for an adversary
to compromise the system, for example, by blinding detectors.
The verifiable or certifiable random number generator
was first demonstrated using trapped ions in 2010.
The locality loophole wasn't closed,
but the two halves of the experiment
were spatially separated and thought to be not interacting.
Of course, the only way to know for sure
is to close the locality loophole,
and in 2018, some of the same people that
showed they could close the loopholes in Bell's inequality
tests then used their system to make
a certifiable random number generator.
I'd like to close by pointing out the timeline for device
independent applications.
It all started back in the '30s when Einstein, Podolsky,
and Rosen wrote a paper on what they viewed
as a paradox and a reason that quantum mechanics was
incomplete-- this concept that they rejected
called spooky action at a distance.
Then nearly 30 years later, John Bell
realized that there's an experiment you could do
to shed light on this paradox.
People did the first experiments demonstrating the violation
of Bell's inequality in the '80s,
and more than 20 years later, they
came up with an idea of device independence
and demonstrated it in a real system.
Perhaps, someday we'll have black box applications
on a chip.
If so, this would be an amazing story
about how something that started out
as a scientific curiosity, something that addressed
a question mainly of philosophical interest
ended up having profound effects on security.
