
If somebody gives you a single photon of unknown polarization
and wants you to transmit it to somewhere else.
Of course, it's a photon.
It naturally likes to travel.
You can send it to them.
But suppose it's daytime.
And you want to send it to somewhere else.
And there's too many photons around.
How can you get this photon to another destination intact?
Well, you could try to measure its polarization.
But if you did, you might measure along a wrong axis.
And you might spoil it.
If you measured it, then, of course,
you could tell the receiver your result.
But it would be a bad copy.
It seems like the uncertainty principle prevents you
from getting all the information out
about the state of the photon.
And if you can't get the information out of it, how
can you get a copy of this photon
or get it to another destination intact?
Well, quantum teleportation is a way
to make it end run around this logic.
And it uses entanglement.
And here's how you do it.
First, I'll say why it doesn't work if you don't use entangle.
So I've got this photon of an unknown polarization.
The best I can do is to measure it.
And that uses the photon up and gives me
incomplete information.
So I would then send this partial information.
And I would make an approximate copy--
a copy that might be right or might be wrong
or might have a polarization that isn't quite right.
So that's the trouble.
And it would seem the uncertainty principle prevents
this job from being done.
Well now here's what we can do to get around that problem.
We use more photons.
We have our original photon A, and we
want to get it to another destination.
So we now take two entangled particles, which
I'll called B and C. They've never been near photon A.
And they don't know anything about the state of A.
And what we do is we make a measurement, not on A alone,
but on A and B together.
And since those are two photons, we
can get four possible outcomes of that measurement,
so we do that.
Essentially we're measuring the relation
between their polarizations without measuring
the polarization of either one.
And, of course, that spoils both of them.
So this looks like we we're worse off than.
And we don't even have one copy of the information
that we wanted to get to the receiver
over on the right side of the figure.
But we take this information that we got-- the relation.
And that's a two-bit message.
And we send it to the receiving location.
And then at the receiving location,
the receiver takes the other entangled particle
C, who's never been anywhere near A
and does one of four different rotations on it.
You might say applies a corrective treatment.
And when you do that, it puts it into an exact copy
of the state of photon A that you
spoiled by measuring it in the first part of the protocol.
So at no point do you exactly learn the state of this photon.
But you protected it from being damaged.
And then you've destroyed one copy on the left
and produced a perfect replica on the right.
And that's what we call quantum teleportation.
I could draw some equations for this showing how this works.
But can we do it in a metaphoric way?
And the metaphor I have is to say, suppose Alice--
suppose she's witnessed a complicated crime
with possible terrorist implications here in Boston?
Now, the FBI in Washington knows that her memory
is this fragile dreamlike form.
And they want to ask her just the right questions
in the right order.
And not to spoil her memory by asking her wrong questions.
And they certainly don't want to leave the investigation
to the Boston Police who will ask her stupid questions
and confuse her.
And so they ask her to come to Washington
and be interviewed by a panel of experts
who will ask her just the right questions in just
the right order.
And probably these questions even
depend on confidential information
they wouldn't want to share with the Boston Police.
But Alice doesn't like travel, and she refuses to go.
So they decide to send one of their agents to Boston.
Unfortunately, their agents are all
very opinionated about the case.
And they don't trust each other to ask the right questions.
Well, there's two agents who seem to be pretty useless.
They're around the FBI, but they don't
seem to understand anything.
They're twin brothers, Remus and Romulus.
And they don't have an opinion about anything.
If you ask either one of them a question
about any subject at all, they give a completely random
answer.
But for some reason, they would always give the same answer
as each other.
So hearing about this problem of who's going to go to Boston
and talk to Alice, Remus says, well, I don't know anything
about the case.
So I'm less likely to influence her than any of you.
Besides, I like to travel.
Just ask my brother, and Romulus agrees.
So they send Remus to go to Boston to meet Alice.
And they explain that this is really a speed date.
They're not supposed to discuss anything substantive.
They just have to figure out whether they
click in their relationship.
Well, it goes really badly.
And Alice leaves in a few minutes,
saying I can't stand this guy.
And for some reason, it's been so stressful
that I forget everything about this crime.
And the Boston Police thank her and say she can go home.
Then they get on the phone to Washington
and say, well, it looks like Alice and Remus
don't get along.
So the FBI, the x, then go to Romulus and say,
well it looks like Alice and your brother don't get on.
So any question that we would have asked Alice,
we can ask you.
And we know that whenever you say yes,
she would have said no.
So they proceed with their careful
questioning, reversing every one of Romulus's answers
to get what Alice would have answered.
In other words, the metaphor is that by the speed date,
Alice has transplanted her state, not
into Remus, but into his twin brother
but with a random rotation.
In this case, a reversal of all the answers.
So when you work for the math of teleportation,
essentially that's what it does.
