FILE: 0002077v3.pdf
PAGES: 9
TITLE_GUESS: The Physical Implementation of Quantum Computation
ABSTRACT_EXTRACT:
[not found]
FIRST_PAGES_TEXT:
arXiv:quant-ph/0002077v3 13 Apr 2000 The Physical Implementation of Quantum Computation David P. DiVincenzo IBM T.J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY 10598 USA (November 26, 2024) After a brief introduction to the principles and promise of q uantum information processing, the requirements for the physical implementation of quantum co mputation are discussed. These ﬁve requirements, plus two relating to the communication of qua ntum information, are extensively ex- plored and related to the many schemes in atomic physics, qua ntum optics, nuclear and electron magnetic resonance spectroscopy, superconducting electr onics, and quantum-dot physics, for achiev- ing quantum computing. I. INTRODUCTION ∗ The advent of quantum information processing, as an abstract concept, has given birth to a great deal of new thinking, of a very concrete form, about how to create physical computing devices that operate in the hitherto unexplored quantum mechanical regime. The eﬀorts now underway to produce working laboratory devices that perform this profoundly new form of information pro- cessing are the subject of this book. In this chapter I provide an overview of the common objectives of the investigations reported in the remain- der of this special issue. The scope of the approaches, proposed and underway, to the implementation of quan- tum hardware is remarkable, emerging from specialties in atomic physics [1], in quantum optics [2], in nuclear [3] and electron [4] magnetic resonance spectroscopy, in su- perconducting device physics [5], in electron physics [6], and in mesoscopic and quantum dot research [7]. This amazing variety of approaches has arisen because, as we will see, the principles of quantum computing are posed using the most fundamental ideas of quantum mechanics, ones whose embodiment can be contemplated in virtually every branch of quantum physics. The interdisciplinary spirit which has been fostered as a result is one of the most pleasant and remarkable fea- tures of this ﬁeld. The excitement and freshness that has been produced bodes well for the prospect for discovery, invention, and innovation in this endeavor. II. WHY QUANTUM INFORMATION PROCESSING? The shortest of answers to this question would be, why not? The manipulation and transmission of information is today carried out by physical machines (computers, ∗Prepared for Fortschritte der Physik special issue, Experi- mental Proposals for Quantum Computation , eds. H.-K. Lo and S. Braunstein. routers, scanners, etc.), in which the embodiment and transformations of this information can be described us- ing the language of classical mechanics. But the ﬁnal physical theory of the world is not Newtonian mechanics, and there is no reason to suppose that machines follow- ing the laws of quantum mechanics should have the same computational power as classical machines; indeed, since Newtonian mechanics emerges as a special limit of quan- tum mechanics, quantum machines can only have greater computational power than classical ones. The great pio- neers and visionaries who pointed the way towards quan- tum computers, Deutsch [8], Feynman [9], and others, were stimulated by such thoughts. Of course, by a similar line of reasoning, it may well be asked whether machines embodying the principles of other reﬁned descriptions of nature (perhaps general relativity or string theory) may have even more information processing capabilities; spec- ulations exist about these more exotic possibilities, but they are beyond the scope of the present discussion. But computing with quantum mechanics really de- serves a lot more attention than wormhole computing or quantum-gravity computing; quantum computing, while far in the future from the perspective of CMOS roadmaps and projections of chip fab advances, can certainly be seen as a real prospect from the perspective of research studies in quantum physics. It does not require science ﬁction to envision a quantum computer; the proposals discussed later in this issue paint a rather deﬁnite pic- ture of what a real quantum computer will look like. So, how much is gained by computing with quantum physics over computing with classical physics? We do not seem to be near to a ﬁnal answer to this question, which is natural since even the ultimate computing power of classical machines remains unknown. But the answer as we know it today has an unexpected structure; it is not that quantum tools simply speed up all information processing tasks by a uniform amount. By a standard complexity measure (i.e., the way in which the number of computational steps required to complete a task grows with the “size” n of the task), some tasks are not sped up at all [10] by using quantum tools (e.g., obtaining the nth iterate of a function f (f (...f (x)... )) [11]), some are sped up moderately (locating an entry in a database of n entries [12]), and some are apparently sped up exponen- 1 tially (Shor’s algorithm for factoring an n-digit number [13]). In other types of information processing tasks, partic- ularly those involving communication [14], both quan- titative and qualitative improvements are seen [15]: for certain tasks (choosing a free day for an appointment be- tween two parties from out of n days) there is a quadratic reduction of the amount of communicated data required, if quantum states rather than classical states are trans- mitted [16]. For some tasks (the “set disjointness prob- lem”, related to allocating non-overlapping segments of a shared memory in a distributed computation) the re- duction of required communication is exponential [17]. Finally, there are tasks that are doable in the quan- tum world that have no counterpart classically: quantum cryptography provides an absolute secrecy of communi- cation between parties that is impossible classically [18] . And for some games, winning strategies become possible with the use of quantum resources that are not available otherwise [19,20]. This issue, and this chapter, are primarily concerned with the “hows” of quantum computing rather than the “whys,” so we will leave behind the computer science after this extremely brief mention. There is no shortage of other places to obtain more information about these things; I recommend the recent articles by Aharonov [21] and by Cleve [22]; other general introductions [23] will give the reader pointers to the already vast specialized literature on this subject. III. REALIZING QUANTUM COMPUTATION Let me proceed with the main topic: the physical re- alization of quantum information processing. As a guide to the remainder of the special issue, and as a means of reviewing the basic steps required to make quantum computation work, I can think of no better plan than to review a set of basic criteria that my coworkers and I have been discussing over the last few years [24] for the realization of quantum computation (and communi- cation), and to discuss the application of these criteria to the multitude of physical implementations that are found below. So, without further ado, here are the Five (plus two) requirements for the implemen- tation of quantum computation 1. A scalable physical system with well characterized qubits For a start, a physical system containing a collection of qubits is needed. A qubit (or, more precisely, the em- bodiment of a qubit) is [25] simply a quantum two-level system like the two spin states of a spin 1/2 particle, like the ground and excited states of an atom, or like the vertical and horizontal polarization of a single pho- ton. The generic notation for a qubit state denotes one state as |0⟩ and the other as |1⟩. The essential feature that distinguishes a qubit from a bit is that, according to the laws of quantum mechanics, the permitted states of a single qubit ﬁlls up a two-dimensional complex vec- tor space; the general state is written a|0⟩ +b|1⟩, where a and b are complex numbers, and a normalization con- vention |a|2 + |b|2 = 1 is normally adopted. The general state of two qubits, a|00⟩ +b|01⟩ +c|10⟩ +d|11⟩, is a four- dimensional vector, one dimension for each distinguish- able state of the two systems. These states are generi- cally entangled, meaning that they cannot be written as a product of the states of two individual qubits. The general state of n qubits is speciﬁed by a 2 n-dimensional complex vector. A qubit being “well characterized” means several dif- ferent things. Its physical parameters should be accu- rately known, including the internal Hamiltonian of the qubit (which determines the energy eigenstates of the qubit, which are often, although not always, taken as the |0⟩ and |1⟩ states), the presence of and couplings to other states of the qubit, the interactions with other qubits, and the couplings to external ﬁelds that might be used to manipulate the state of the qubit. If the qubit has third, fourth, etc., levels, the computer’s control appa- ratus should be designed so that the probability of the system ever going into these states is small. The small- ness of this and other parameters will be determined by the capabilities of quantum error correction, which will be discussed under requirement 3. Recognizing a qubit can be trickier than one might think. For example, we might consider a pair of one- electron quantum dots that share a single electron be- tween them as a two-qubit system. It is certainly true that we can denote the presence or absence of an elec- tron on each dot by |0⟩ and |1⟩, and it is well known experimentally how to put this system into the “entan- gled” state 1/ √ 2(|01⟩ + |10⟩) in which the electron is in a superposition of being on the left dot and the right dot. But it is fallacious to consider this as a two-qubit system; while the states |00⟩ and |11⟩ are other allowed physical states of the dots, superselection principles for - bid the creation of entangled states involving diﬀerent particle numbers such as 1 / √ 2(|00⟩ + |11⟩). It is therefore false to consider this as a two-qubit sys- tem, and, since there are not two qubits, it is nonsense to say that there is entanglement in this system. It is correct to say that the electron is in a superposition of diﬀerent quantum states living on the two diﬀerent dots. It is also perfectly correct to consider this system to be the embodiment of a single qubit, spanned by the states (in the misleading notation above) |01⟩ (“electron on the right dot”) and |10⟩ (“electron on the left dot”). In- deed, several of the viable proposals, including the ones by Sch¨ on, Averin, and Tanamoto in this special issue, use exactly this system as a qubit. However, false lines of reasoning like the one outlined here have sunk various proposals before they were properly launched (no such abortive proposals are represented in this book, but they 2 can be found occasionally in the literature). An amazing variety of realizations of the qubit are rep- resented in this volume. There is a very well developed line of work that began with the proposal of Cirac and Zoller [1] for an ion-trap quantum computer, in which, in its quiescent state, the computer holds the qubits in pairs of energy levels of ions held in a linear electromag- netic trap. Various pairs of energy levels (e.g., Zeeman- degenerate ground states, as are also used in the NMR approach [3] discussed by Cory) have been proposed and investigated experimentally. The many neutral-atom proposals (see chapters by Kimble [2], Deutsch [26], and Briegel [27]) use similar atomic energy levels of neutral species. These atomic-physics based proposals use other auxiliary qubits such as the position of atoms in a trap or lattice, the presence or absence of a photon in an opti- cal cavity, or the vibrational quanta of trapped electrons, ions or atoms (in the Platzman proposal below [6] this is the primary qubit). Many of the solid-state propos- als exploit the fact that impurities or quantum dots have well characterized discrete energy level spectra; these in - clude the spin states of quantum dots (see chapters by Loss [7] and Imamoglu [2]), the spin states of donor im- purities (see Kane [4]), and the orbital or charge states of quantum dots (see Tanamoto [7]). Finally, there are a variety of interesting proposals which use the quantized states of superconducting devices, either ones involving the (Cooper-pair) charge (see Sch¨ on, Averin), or the ﬂux (see Mooij) [5]. 2. The ability to initialize the state of the qubits to a simple ﬁducial state, such as |000... ⟩ This arises ﬁrst from the straightforward computing re- quirement that registers should be initialized to a known value before the start of computation. There is a second reason for this initialization requirement: quantum error correction (see requirement 3 below) requires a contin- uous, fresh supply of qubits in a low-entropy state (like the |0⟩ state). The need for a continuous supply of 0s, rather than just an initial supply, is a real headache for many proposed implementations. But since it is likely that a demonstration of a substantial degree of quantum error correction is still quite some time oﬀ, the problem of continuous initialization does not have to be solved very soon; still, experimentalists should be aware that the speed with which a qubit can be zeroed will eventu- ally be a very important issue. If the time it takes to do this initialization is relatively long compared with gate- operation times (see requirement 4), then the quantum computer will have to equipped with some kind of “qubit conveyor belt”, on which qubits in need of initialization are carried away from the region in which active compu- tation is taking place, initialized while on the “belt”, the n brought back to the active place after the initialization is ﬁnished. (A similar parade of qubits will be envisioned in requirement 5 for the case of low quantum-eﬃciency measurements [28].) There are two main approaches to setting qubits to a standard state: the system can either be “naturally” cooled when the ground state of its Hamiltonian is the state of interest, or the standard state can be achieved by a measurement which projects the system either into the state desired or another state which can be rotated into it. These approaches are not fundamentally diﬀer- ent from one another, since the projection procedure is a form of cooling; for instance, the laser cooling techniques used routinely now for the cooling of ion states to near their ground state in a trap [1] are closely connected to the ﬂuorescence techniques used to measure the state of these ions. A more “natural” kind of cooling is advocated in many of the electron spin resonance based techniques (using quantum dots or impurities) [7,4] in which the spins are placed in a strong magnetic ﬁeld and allowed to align with it via interaction with their heat bath. In this kind of approach the time scale will be a problem. Since the natural thermalization times are never shorter than the decoherence time of the system, this procedure will be too slow for the needs of error correction and a “conveyor belt” scheme would be required. Cooling by projection, in which the Hamiltonian of the system and its environment are necessarily perturbed strongly, will have a time scale dependent on the details of the setup, but potentially much shorter than the natural relaxation times. One cannot say too much more at this point, as the schemes for measurement have in many cases not been fully implemented (see requirement 5). In the NMR quantum computer implementations to date (see Cory below), cooling of the initial state has been foregone al- together; it is acknowledged [3] that until some of the proposed cooling schemes are implemented (a nontrivial thing to do), NMR can never be a scalable scheme for quantum computing. 3. Long relevant decoherence times, much longer than the gate operation time Decoherence times characterize the dynamics of a qubit (or any quantum system) in contact with its envi- ronment. The (somewhat overly) simpliﬁed deﬁnition of this time is that it is the characteristic time for a generic qubit state |ψ ⟩ = a|0⟩ +b|1⟩ to be transformed into the mixtureρ = |a|2|0⟩⟨0|+ |b|2|1⟩⟨1|. A more proper charac- terization of decoherence, in which the decay can depend on the form of the initial state, in which the state ampli- tudes may change as well, and in which other quantum states of the qubit can play a role (in a special form of state decay called “leakage” in quantum computing [29,30]), is rather more technical than I want to get here; but see Refs. [31] and [32] for a good general discussion of all these. Even the simplest discussion of decoherence that I have given here should also be extended to in- clude the possibility that the decoherence of neighboring qubits is correlated. It seems safest to assume that they will be neither completely correlated nor completely un- correlated, and the thinking about error correction has taken this into account. Decoherence is very important for the fundamentals 3 of quantum physics, as it is identiﬁed as the principal mechanism for the emergence of classical behavior. For the same reason, decoherence is very dangerous for quan- tum computing, since if it acts for very long, the capa- bility of the quantum computer will not be so diﬀerent from that of a classical machine. The decoherence time must be long enough that the uniquely quantum features of this style of computation have a chance to come into play. How long is “long enough” is also indicated by the results of quantum error correction, which I will summa- rize shortly. I have indicated that the “relevant” decoherence times should be long enough. This emphasizes that a quantum particle can have many decoherence times pertaining to diﬀerent degrees of freedom of that particle. But many of these can be irrelevant to the functioning of this par- ticle as a qubit. For example, the rapid decoherence of an electron’s position state in a solid stat