FILE: 1801.00862v3.pdf
PAGES: 20
TITLE_GUESS: Quantum Computing in the NISQ era and beyond
ABSTRACT_EXTRACT:
[not found]
FIRST_PAGES_TEXT:
Quantum Computing in the NISQ era and beyond John Preskill Institute for Quantum Information and Matter and Walter Burke Institute for Theoretical Physics, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena CA 91125, USA 30 July 2018 Noisy Intermediate-Scale Quantum (NISQ) technology will be available in thenearfuture. Quantumcomputerswith50-100qubitsmaybeabletoperform tasks which surpass the capabilities of today’s classical digital computers, but noise in quantum gates will limit the size of quantum circuits that can be executed reliably. NISQ devices will be useful tools for exploring many-body quantum physics, and may have other useful applications, but the 100-qubit quantum computer will not change the world right away — we should regard it as a signiﬁcant step toward the more powerful quantum technologies of the future. Quantum technologists should continue to strive for more accurate quantum gates and, eventually, fully fault-tolerant quantum computing. 1 Introduction Now is an opportune time for a fruitful discussion among researchers, entrepreneurs, man- agers, and investors who share an interest in quantum computing. There has been a recent surge of investment by both large public companies and startup companies, a trend that has surprised many quantumists working in academia. While we have long recognized the commercial potential of quantum technology, this ramping up of industrial activity has happened sooner and more suddenly than most of us expected. In this article I assess the current status and future potential of quantum computing. Because quantum computing technology is so diﬀerent from the information technology we use now, we have only a very limited ability to glimpse its future applications, or to project when these applications will come to fruition. While this uncertainty fuels optimism, our optimism should be tempered with caution. We may feel conﬁdent that quantum technology will have a substantial impact on society in the decades ahead, but we cannot be nearly so conﬁdent about the commercial potential of quantum technology in the near term, say the next ﬁve to ten years. That is the main message I hope to convey. With that said, I’m sure that vigorous discussion among all the interested parties can help light the way toward future progress. 2 Opportunities at the entanglement frontier I am a theoretical physicist with a background in particle physics and cosmology, but for more than 20 years much of my research eﬀort has been directed toward quantum information science. I’m drawn to this ﬁeld because I feel we are now in the early stages John Preskill: preskill@caltech.edu, Based on a Keynote Address at Quantum Computing for Business, 5 De- cember 2017. Accepted in Quantum 2018-07-30, click title to verify 1 arXiv:1801.00862v3 [quant-ph] 31 Jul 2018 of exploring a new frontier of the physical sciences, what we might call thecomplexity frontier or theentanglement frontier. This new frontier, while diﬀerent than the frontier of particle physics or cosmology, is very fundamental and exciting. Now, for the ﬁrst time in human history, we are acquiring and perfecting the tools to build and precisely control very complex, highly entangled quantum states of many particles, states so complex that we can’t simulate them with our best digital computers or characterize them well using existing theoretical tools. This emerging capability will open the door to new discoveries. For a physicist like me, what is really exciting about quantum computing is that we have good reason to believe that a quantum computer would be able to eﬃciently simulate any process that occurs in Nature. We don’t think that’s not true for classical (i.e., non- quantum) digital computers, which (as far as we know) can’t simulate highly entangled quantum systems. With quantum computers we should be able to probe more deeply into the properties of complex molecules and exotic materials, and also to explore fundamental physics in new ways, for example by simulating the properties of elementary particles, or the quantum behavior of a black hole, or the evolution of the universe right after the big bang. Our conﬁdence that exploration of the entanglement frontier will be rewarding rests largely on two principles: (1) quantum complexity (our basis for thinking that quantum computing is powerful), and (2) quantum error correction (our basis for thinking that quantum computers are scalable to large devices solving hard problems). Underlying both of these principles is the idea ofquantum entanglement. Entanglement is the word we use for the characteristic correlations among the parts of a quantum system, which are quite diﬀerent from the correlations we encounter in everyday life. To understand the concept of entanglement, imagine a system with many parts, for example a book which is 100 pages long. For an ordinary classical 100-page book, every time you read another page you learn another 1% of the content of the book, and after you have read all of the pages one by one you know everything that’s in the book. But now suppose instead that it’s a quantum book, where the pages are very highly entangled with one another. Then when you look at the pages one at a time you see only random gibberish, and after you have read all the pages one by one you know very little about the content of the book. That’s because the information in the quantum book is not imprinted on the individual pages; it is encoded almost entirely in how the pages are correlated with one another. If you want to read the book you have to make a collective observation on many pages at once. That’s quantum entanglement, the essential feature making information carried by quantum systems very diﬀerent from information processed by ordinary digital computers. 3 The potential of quantum computing 3.1 Why we think quantum computing is powerful An ordinary computer processes bits, where each bit could be, say, a switch which is either one or oﬀ. But to build highly complex entangled quantum systems, the fundamental information-carrying components of a quantum computer must be quantum bits, what we call qubits. A qubit can be realized physically in many diﬀerent ways. It can be carried by a single atom, or a single electron, or a single photon (a particle of light). Or a qubit can be carried by a more complicated system, like a very cold superconducting electrical circuit in which many electrons are moving. When we speak of quantum complexity, what springs to mind is the staggering com- plexity of using ordinary classical data to describe highly entangled quantum states of Accepted in Quantum 2018-07-30, click title to verify 2 many qubits. Giving a complete description of all the correlations among just a few hun- dred qubits may require more bits than the number of atoms in the visible universe. It will never be possible, even in principle, to write that description down, or to faithfully describe the processing of a few hundred qubits using classical language. This apparently extravagant complexity of the quantum world, though highly sugges- tive, does not by itself ensure that quantum computers are more powerful than classical ones. But we have at least three good reasons for thinking that quantum computers have capabilities surpassing what classical computers can do. (1) Quantum algorithms for classically intractable problems.First, we know of problems that are believed to be hard for classical computers, but for which quantum algo- rithms have been discovered that could solve these problems easily. The best known example is the problem of ﬁnding the prime factors of a large composite integer [1]. We believe factoring is hard because many smart people have tried for many decades to ﬁnd better factoring algorithms and haven’t succeeded. Perhaps a fast classical factoring algorithm will be discovered in the future, but that would be a big surprise. (2) Complexity theory arguments.The theoretical computer scientists have provided ar- guments, based on complexity theory, showing (under reasonable assumptions) that quantum states which are easy to prepare with a quantum computer have super- classical properties; speciﬁcally, if we measure all the qubits in such a state we are sampling from a correlated probability distribution that can’t be sampled from by any eﬃcient classical means [2, 3]. (3) No known classical algorithm can simulate a quantum computer.But perhaps the most persuasive argument we have that quantum computing is powerful is simply that we don’t know how to simulate a quantum computer using a digital computer; that remains true even after many decades of eﬀort by physicists to ﬁnd better ways to simulate quantum systems. It’s a remarkable claim — one of the most amazing ideas I’ve encountered in my scientiﬁc life — that there is a distinction between problems that are classically hard and problems that are quantumly hard. And it is a compelling challenge to understand better what problems are classically hard but quantumly easy [4, 5]. We should recognize in particular that the power of a quantum computer is not unlimited. We don’t expect, for example, thataquantumcomputerwillbeabletosolveeﬃcientlythehardinstancesofNP- hard problems like the traveling salesman problem. For such hard combinatorial search problems we probably can’t do much better than exhaustively searching for a solution. Quantum computers can speed up exhaustive search [6], but only modestly [7], so NP- hard problems are likely to be quantumly hard as well as classically hard. For a physicist seeking problems which are classically hard and quantumly easy, the natural place to look is the task of simulating a many-particle quantum system. As two great physicists, Bob Laughlin and David Pines, put it some years ago [8], we have a “the- ory of everything that is relevant to ordinary life.” We have high conﬁdence this theory is correct, and we can write down the equations precisely — they are the equations that describe how atomic nuclei and electrons interact electromagnetically. But we can’t solve those equations. And so as Laughlin and Pines put it: “We have a theory of everything only to discover that it has revealed exactly nothing about many things of great importance.” Those things of importance they envisaged are the situations in the quantum world where entanglement has profound consequences. Dramatizing the futility of the task they pro- Accepted in Quantum 2018-07-30, click title to verify 3 claimed: “No computer existing, or that will ever exist, can break this barrier” of solving the equations describing many entangled particles. But in fact, years before Laughlin and Pines wrote these words, the physicist Richard Feynman had articulated a rebuttal [9]. As Feynman put it: “Nature isn’t classical dammit, andifyouwanttomakeasimulationofNatureyoubettermakeitquantummechanical, and by golly it’s a wonderful problem because it doesn’t look so easy.” Feynman had envisioned using a quantum computer to solve the quantum physics problems that physicists and chemists had failed to solve using digital computers. Laughlin and Pines knew well that Feynman had made this proposal years earlier, but had dismissed his idea as impractical. Now, some 35 years after Feynman’s proposal, we’re just beginning to reach the stage where quantum computers can provide useful solutions to hard quantum problems. 3.2 Why quantum computing is hard So why is it taking so long? What is it about quantum computing that’s so diﬃcult? The core of the problem stems from a fundamental feature of the quantum world — that we cannot observe a quantum system without producing an uncontrollable disturbance in the system. That means that if we want to use a quantum system to store and reliably process information, then we need to keep that system nearly perfectly isolated from the outside world. At the same time, though, we want the qubits to strongly interact with one another so we can process the information; we also need to be able to control the system from the outside, and eventually read out the qubits so we can ﬁnd the result of our computation. It isvery challenging to build a quantum system that satisﬁes all of these desiderata. It has taken many years of development in materials and control and fabrication to get where we are now. Eventually we expect to be able to protect quantum systems and scale up quantum computers using the principle of quantum error correction [10]. The essential idea of quantum error correction is that if we want to protect a quantum system from damage then we should encode it in a very highly entangled state; like that 100-page book I described earlier, this entangled state has the property that the environment, interacting with parts of the system one at a time, is unable to glimpse the encoded information and therefore can’t damage it. Furthermore, we’ve understood in principle how to process quantum information which is encoded in a highly entangled state. Unfortunately, there is a signiﬁcant overhead cost for doing quantum error correction — writing the protected quantuminformationintoahighlyentangledbookrequiresmanyadditionalphysicalqubits — so reliable quantum computers using quantum error correction are not likely to be available very soon. 4 The NISQ era unfolds 4.1 The 50-qubit barrier Even with fault-tolerant quantum computing still a rather distant dream, we are now enteringapivotalnewerainquantumtechnology. Forthistalk, Ineededanametodescribe this impending new era, so I made up a word:NISQ. This stands forNoisy Intermediate- Scale Quantum. Here “intermediate scale” refers to the size of quantum computers which will be available in the next few years, with a number of qubits ranging from 50 to a Accepted in Quantum 2018-07-30, click title to verify 4