FILE: 1903.06559v1.pdf
PAGES: 37
TITLE_GUESS: Perspectives of quantum annealing: Methods and
ABSTRACT_EXTRACT:
[not found]
FIRST_PAGES_TEXT:
Perspectives of quantum annealing: Methods and implementations Philipp Hauke 1,2, Helmut G. Katzgraber 3,4,5, Wolfgang Lechner6,7‡, Hidetoshi Nishimori 8,9, William D. Oliver 10,11 1 Kirchhoﬀ-Institute for Physics, Heidelberg University, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany 2 Institute for Theoretical Physics, Heidelberg University, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany 3Microsoft Quantum, Microsoft Corporation, Redmond, WA 98052, USA 4Department of Physics and Astronomy, Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas 77843-4242, USA 5Santa Fe Institute, 1399 Hyde Park Road, Santa Fe, New Mexico 87501 USA 6 Institute for Theoretical Physics, University of Innsbruck, 6020 Innsbruck, Austria 7 Institute for Quantum Optics and Quantum Information, Austrian Academy of Sciences, 6020 Innsbruck, Austria 8Institute of Innovative Research, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Nagatsuta-cho, Midori-ku, Yokohama 226-8503, Japan 9Graduate School of Information Sciences, Tohoku University, Sendai 980-8579, Japan 10Research Laboratory of Electronics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA 11MIT Lincoln Laboratory, 244 Wood Street, Lexington, Massachusetts 02420, USA Abstract. Quantum annealing is a computing paradigm that has the ambitious goal of eﬃciently solving large-scale combinatorial optimization problems of practical importance. However, many challenges have yet to be overcome before this goal can be reached. This perspectives article ﬁrst gives a brief introduction to the concept of quantum annealing, and then highlights new pathways that may clear the way towards feasible and large scale quantum annealing. Moreover, since this ﬁeld of research is to a strong degree driven by a synergy between experiment and theory, we discuss both in this work. An important focus in this article is on future perspectives, which complements other review articles, and which we hope will motivate further research. PACS numbers: 00.00 Keywords: Review, Quantum Annealing, Adiabatic Quantum Optimization 1. Introduction The last two decades have seen tantalizing progress in the engineering of quantum devices, raising the hope to realize quantum technologies based on precise control ‡ Corresponding author: Wolfgang.Lechner@uibk.ac.at arXiv:1903.06559v1 [quant-ph] 15 Mar 2019 Perspectives of quantum annealing: Methods and implementations 2 over large ensembles of microscopic quantum degrees of freedom [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13]. Notable examples are small-scale prototypes of circuit(gate)- based quantum computers, which use logical gate operations on quantum bits (qubits). These devices, if ideally built to a large scale, are theoretically proven to be able to run certain quantum algorithms exponentially faster than any classical computer running classical algorithms. However, qubit-based quantum computers are extremely hard to scale up in practice [14], with current quantum processing units consisting of less than one hundred qubits. Even worse, the aforementioned statement assumes that these are perfect qubits; including error correction results in a large overhead when encoding logical variables in physical ones. Given these challenges, researchers have thus searched for less demanding alternatives, which may enable solving certain problems of practical importance, hopefully eﬃciently given particular criteria. Over the history of classical computing, analog special-purpose machines may be seen to have heralded programmable digital universal silicon-based computers. In this article, we present perspectives for an important example of a similar nature, but in the quantum world—quantum annealing and adiabatic quantum optimization—in which remarkable experimental and theoretical advances are currently being observed §. The potential strength of such an approach—at least in the near to medium term—may be seen in the example that the largest number ever factorized on a quantum computer was done using an adiabatic protocol [17]. Quantum annealing [18, 19, 20] has been designed to solve classical combinatorial optimization problems, with applications ranging from computer science problems [21], classiﬁcation [22], quantum chemistry [23], machine learning [24], search engine ranking [25] to protein folding [26]. Such optimization problems require the minimization of a cost function, a task that can be rephrased as ﬁnding the ground state of a classical Ising Hamiltonian H0 [27]. Many problems of practical importance, however, have cost functions with a large number of local minima, corresponding to Ising Hamiltonians that are reminiscent of classical spin glasses [28, 29, 30, 31]. These characteristics make it extremely diﬃcult for classical algorithms to ﬁnd the global minimum [20]. Quantum annealing was conceived as an alternative to solve this formidable task, based on the idea to elevate the classical Ising Hamiltonian H0 to the quantum domain, i.e., by taking it to describe a collection of interacting qubits. According to the adiabatic theorem of quantum mechanics [32, 33] (see also Refs. [34, 35, 36]), the ground state of the classical Ising model can be found by initializing the system in the ground state of some initial Hamiltonian H1, which is easy to prepare both theoretically and experimentally. H1 is chosen such that it does not commute with H0, and the system parameters are changed suﬃciently slowly such that the Hamiltonian changes gradually from H1 to H0. More explicitly, the system is described by a time-dependent Hamiltonian (see Fig. 1) H(t) = A(t)H0 + B(t)H1 , (1) § We will also draw connections to another such example, namely special-purpose quantum computers known as quantum simulators, which may help researchers to solve quantum many-body problems [10, 11, 15, 16]. Perspectives of quantum annealing: Methods and implementations 3 𝐻 0 = 𝐻1 𝐻 𝑡 = 𝜏 = 𝐻0 𝐸 Δmin A) B) Figure 1. (A) Recent years have seen exciting developments on quantum-technology platforms (exempliﬁed here by superconducting qubits, trapped ions, Rydberg atoms). These enable the implementation of quantum annealing protocols with the aim of solving hard optimization problems. (B) Sketch of time-dependent energy spectrum. The solution to the optimization problem is encoded in the ground state of a problem Hamiltonian H0. It is reached at the end time τ of a slow sweep starting from the ground state of a Hamiltonian H1 that is simple to prepare. If the sweep is suﬃciently adiabatic (i.e., slow as compared to an inverse polynomial of the minimum gap ∆ min), the system remains in the instantaneous eigenstate throughout (thick line). This article discusses experimental as well as theoretical prospects to boost the performance of such quantum annealers. Picture credits panel A (clockwise from left): MIT Lincoln Laboratory; Blatt group, University of Innsbruck; LCF, Institut dOptique, CNRS. where B(t) is slowly reduced from the initial value B(0) = 1 to the ﬁnal value B(τ) = 0, with τ being the computation time, while A(t) is slowly increased from A(0) = 0 to A(τ) = 1, thus changing the Hamiltonian from H(0) = H1 to H(τ) = H0. The adiabatic theorem states that, under a suﬃciently slow change of the parameters in the Hamiltonian, the system ends up in a state close enough to the ground state of the ﬁnal Hamiltonian H0 if the initial condition is given as the ground state of the initial Hamiltonian H1, meaning that the desired solution to the optimization problem is obtained. Since the ﬁnal Hamiltonian H0 is a classical Ising model with only commuting operators{σz i}, the z component of the Pauli matrix, the solution can then be read out as the state of the individual qubits in the computational basis. Thanks to the simplicity and elegance of this approach as well as its potential impact, several organizations including private companies are heavily investing eﬀorts and resources toward its realization as large-scale quantum devices, mainly based on superconducting qubits [37, 38, 39, 40, 41]. Since the ﬁrst quantum annealing device, the D-Wave device, has become commercially available in 2011 [38], a large number of proof-of-principle demonstrations have appeared, see, for example, Refs. [42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50] and references therein. Nevertheless, there is an ongoing scientiﬁc debate whether such quantum annealing devices can oﬀer an actual speedup over classical computers [51, 52, 53, 54]. For the case of the simple transverse-ﬁeld Ising model, where we choose H1 as the transverse ﬁeld Hamiltonian − ∑N i=1 σx i , with σx i being the Pauli matrix at qubit i, and where H0 is written only in terms of {σz i}, an essential speedup over classical algorithms Perspectives of quantum annealing: Methods and implementations 4 may not be easy to achieve because equilibrium properties of the model, as well as certain aspects of dynamics, can usually be simulated eﬃciently by quantum Monte Carlo methods [55], although with some exceptions, e.g., Ref. [56]. This property is shared by a class of models called ‘stoquastic Hamiltonians’ [57], which are deﬁned as those having a matrix representation with all oﬀ-diagonal elements being non-positive in a product basis, usually the computational basis to diagonalize {σz i}, leading to a classical representation without the sign problem for simulations. The situation is further complicated by the presence of noise and a variety of imperfections in real devices, all of which degrade the performance, sometimes signiﬁcantly. In the present article, we aim to highlight new pathways and perspectives for the development of quantum annealing in the hope to clear the way towards establishment of feasible approaches for eﬃciently solving large-scale problems of practical importance. Therefore, an important focus of this article is on future perspectives, making its characteristics rather complementary to typical review articles [58, 59, 60]. Correspondingly, the list of references may be far from complete, for which we apologize to many authors. This article is organized as follows. In Sec. 2, we lay some theoretical framework of quantum annealing, starting from the representation of combinatorial optimization problems as classical Ising spin glasses, followed by an explanation of the essence of the adiabatic condition and the connection of the minimum energy gap to computational complexity. We also discuss how quantum annealing performs as compared to classical algorithms, and we point out the open question regarding the role of quantum entanglement in any possible quantum speedup. The core of the article consists of Secs. 3 and 4. In Sec. 3, we highlight several promising routes towards enhancing the performance of quantum annealing based on improvements in algorithms. These include judicious choices of the quantum driving term H1 and non-adiabatic schemes. In Sec. 4, we discuss perspectives on the superconducting qubit platform and illustrate potential alternatives based on ultracold Rydberg atoms and trapped ions. Finally, we brieﬂy summarize our discussions in Sec. 5. 2. Theoretical framework In this section, we recapitulate some of the theoretical framework that underlies the concept of quantum annealing, which will be useful for subsequent discussions. 2.1. From optimization problems to spin glasses As stated in the Introduction, the main motivation for building quantum annealing machines such as the D-Wave device is to solve combinatorial optimization problems, in particular in the form of binary optimization problems. While the restriction to binary variables might seem narrow at ﬁrst, a wide variety of NP-hard optimization problems of interest in industry fall under this category. Because in most cases only