FILE: 1904.04178v1.pdf
PAGES: 56
TITLE_GUESS: Trapped-Ion Quantum Computing: Progress and Challenges
ABSTRACT_EXTRACT:
[not found]
FIRST_PAGES_TEXT:
Trapped-Ion Quantum Computing: Progress and Challenges Colin D. Bruzewicz,∗ John Chiaverini,† Robert McConnell,‡ and Jeremy M. Sage§ Lincoln Laboratory, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Lexington, MA, 02420 (Dated: April 9, 2019) Trapped ions are among the most promising systems for practical quantum computing (QC). The basic requirements for universal QC have all been demonstrated with ions and quantum algorithms using few-ion-qubit systems have been implemented. We review the state of the ﬁeld, covering the basics of how trapped ions are used for QC and their strengths and limitations as qubits. In addition, we discuss what is being done, and what may be required, to increase the scale of trapped ion quantum computers while mitigating decoherence and control errors. Finally, we explore the outlook for trapped-ion QC. In particular, we discuss near-term applications, considerations impacting the design of future systems of trapped ions, and experiments and demonstrations that may further inform these considerations. CONTENTS I. Introduction 2 A. Trapped Ions for Quantum Computing 2 B. Scope of this Review 2 C. DiVincenzo Criteria 2 D. Pros and Cons of Trapped Ions as Qubits 3 E. Considerations for Scaling a Trapped-Ion Quantum Computer 5 II. Trapped Ions as Qubits 6 A. Trapping Individual Ions 6 1. Types of Ion Traps 7 2. Paul Traps for QC 7 3. Miniature, Microfabricated, and Surface-Electrode Traps 8 4. Loading Ions into Traps 9 B. Internal States: Qubit Levels 10 1. Zeeman Qubits 10 2. Hyperﬁne Qubits 11 3. Optical Qubits 12 4. Fine-Structure Qubits 13 C. Motional States 13 1. Motional State Decoherence 13 2. Anomalous Motional Heating 14 III. Trapped Ion Qubit Control 15 A. State Preparation 15 B. Qubit Logic 16 1. Types of Gates: Optical, Raman, Microwave 16 2. Single Qubit Gates 17 3. Multi Qubit Gates 17 4. Gate Characterization: Tomography, Benchmarking, and Calibration 20 5. Crosstalk 21 C. State Detection 22 ∗ colin.bruzewicz@ll.mit.edu † john.chiaverini@ll.mit.edu ‡ robert.mcconnell@ll.mit.edu § jsage@ll.mit.edu D. Quantum Control Demonstrations: Quantum Computing Algorithms and Primitives 25 IV. Methodologies for Practical Trapped-Ion Quantum Computing 26 A. Architectures and Techniques for Scaling to Larger Numbers of Ions 26 1. Linear Arrays 27 2. Two-Dimensional Arrays and the Quantum CCD Architecture 27 3. Photonic Interconnects 28 B. Error Reduction and Mitigation 30 1. Decoherence-Free Subspaces and Composite-Pulse Control 31 2. Error Correction 31 3. Dual-Species Ion Systems 33 V. Integrated Technology for Control of Trapped Ions 34 A. Chip-Scale Ion Traps 34 B. Integrated Photonics for Light Delivery 35 C. Integrated Optics and Detectors for Light Collection and Measurement 38 D. Integrated Electronics 39 VI. Outlook 39 A. The NISQ Regime 39 B. Further Considerations 40 1. Choice of Ion Species 40 2. Choice of Qubit and Gate Type 42 3. Choice of System Temperature 44 4. Implications 45 C. Future Experiments to Enable Practical Trapped-Ion Quantum Computers 46 Acknowledgments 48 References 48 arXiv:1904.04178v1 [quant-ph] 8 Apr 2019 2 I. INTRODUCTION A. T rapped Ions for Quantum Computing Soon after Shor developed the factoring algorithm that bears his name [1], demonstrating that a large-scale quantum computer could eﬃciently solve useful tasks that were classically intractable, Cirac and Zoller pro- posed an implementation of such a device using indi- vidual atomic ions [2]. In this scheme, ions conﬁned in radiofrequency (RF) traps serve as quantum bits, with entanglement achieved by using the shared ion motional modes as a quantum bus. RF Paul traps had been used to conﬁne single ions since 1980 [3] and appeared to be a promising platform due to the ions’ robust trap life- times, long internal-state coherence, strong ion-ion inter- actions, and the existence of cycling transitions between internal states of ions for measurement and laser cooling. Controlled-NOT (CNOT) gates entangling one ion’s in- ternal state with its motional state were rapidly demon- strated [4] and multi-ion entangled states were demon- strated soon afterwards [5, 6]. Since then, trapped ions have remained one of the leading technology platforms for large-scale QC. Using trapped ions, single-qubit gates [7], two-qubit gates [8], and qubit state preparation and readout [9] have all been performed with ﬁdelity exceeding that required for fault- tolerant QC using high-threshold quantum error correc- tion codes [10]. However, despite the promise shown by trapped ions, there are still many challenges that must be addressed in order to realize a practically useful quantum computer. Chief among these is increasing the number of simultaneously trapped ions while maintaining the abil- ity to control and measure them individually with high ﬁdelity. B. Scope of this Review The goal of this paper is to review recent progress in QC with trapped ions, with a particular emphasis on the challenges inherent in going from high-ﬁdelity demon- strations using a few ions, where the ﬁeld is today, to demonstrations using hundreds or many more. Several excellent review papers exist which treat various aspects of trapped-ion physics in detail [11–17]. As a result, in this paper, we will not present a detailed review of the mechanics of ion trapping or of the equations governing the interaction between ions and electromagnetic control ﬁelds. For these topics the interested reader is referred to the aforementioned reviews. After a brief introduction to trapped ions as a qubit technology, we will discuss methods of controlling trapped-ion qubits. We will review experiments demon- strating single- and two-qubit gates using ion qubits, the achieved ﬁdelities, other important aspects of qubit con- trol including loading and detection, and key outstanding limitations to the scalable implementation of the demon- strated methods. We will next look at recent eﬀorts to increase the number of simultaneously-trapped ions and to develop technologies and methods for robustly con- trolling large numbers of ions. Finally, we will discuss near-term experiments which might hope to achieve in- teresting results with traps of 50 to 100 ions and with- out quantum error correction, and preview the long-term outlook for trapped-ion QC. This paper primarily addresses gate-based approaches to QC, which includes digital quantum simulation [18]. Recently, a diﬀerent approach known as quantum anneal- ing has gathered widespread interest [19, 20]. However, it has still not been shown even theoretically whether quan- tum annealing can yield a speedup over the best classical approaches to a problem. It remains to be seen whether this highly interesting avenue of research will yield useful results, but we will not discuss it further in this article. C. DiVincenzo Criteria In 2000, DiVincenzo outlined ﬁve key criteria for a quantum information processor [21]. These criteria have been used as one basis for assessing the viability of dif- ferent possible physical implementations of a quantum computer. DiVincenzo’s ﬁve criteria include: 1) a physi- cal system containing well-deﬁned two-level quantum sys- tems, or qubits (whose computational basis states are usually written as |0⟩ and|1⟩), which can be isolated from the environment; 2) the ability to initialize the sys- tem into a well-deﬁned and determinate initial state; 3) qubit decoherence times much longer than the gate times; 4) a set of universal quantum gates which can be applied to each qubit (or pair of qubits, in the case of two-qubit gates); and 5) the ability to read out the qubit state with high accuracy. Trapped ions represent one of only a few qubit technologies which have yet fulﬁlled all of DiVin- cenzo’s original criteria with high ﬁdelity. For trapped ions, internal electronic states of the ion are used for the qubit states |0⟩ and|1⟩. Trapped-ion qubits can generally be considered as one of four types: hyperﬁne qubits, where the qubit states are hyperﬁne states of the ion separated by an energy splitting of or- der gigahertz; Zeeman qubits, where the qubit states are magnetic sublevels split by an applied ﬁeld and typically have tens of megahertz frequencies; ﬁne structure qubits, where the qubit states reside in the ﬁne structure levels and are separated by typically tens of terahertz; and op- tical qubits, where the qubit states are separated by an optical transition (typically hundreds of terahertz). Each type of qubit comes with its own particular beneﬁts and drawbacks, as will be described later (see Section II B). Initialization and readout in trapped ions are both per- formed by laser manipulation of the ion internal and mo- tional states. These operations are shown schematically in Fig. 1 for an optical qubit. Initialization is performed via optical pumping into the|1⟩ state, often accompanied by cooling of the ions’ quantized motion to the trap har- 3 SP R State preparation Qubit control State detection (a) (b) (c) FIG. 1. Simpliﬁed depiction of state preparation, control, and detection in trapped-ion optical qubits. (a) The ion can be quickly optically pumped to the|1⟩ state by coupling the long-lived|0⟩ state to an auxiliary state|e⟩SP that rapidly decays. (b) Qubit control is achieved by directly coupling the|0⟩ and|1⟩ states using a narrow electric quadrupole transition. (c) Readout is achieved by shining light resonant on the broad transition |1⟩→| e⟩R, and collecting the resulting scattered ﬂuorescence photons. There is no similar transition |0⟩→| e⟩R so the|0⟩ state appears dark. monic oscillator ground state. State readout is likewise very simple: a resonant laser couples the|1⟩ state to a cy- cling transition which scatters many photons that can be collected by a detector, while no similar transition exists for the |0⟩ state which therefore remains dark. High- ﬁdelity state preparation and readout have both been performed in less than 1 ms [9, 22, 23] (see Section III C for more details). Trapped-ion qubits have also allowed for a demonstra- tion of a universal, high-ﬁdelity set of quantum gates. Laser or microwave drives applied to the ions allow ar- bitrary and high-ﬁdelity single-qubit rotations to be per- formed. In addition, a two-qubit entangling gate is re- quired, which is typically chosen to be the CNOT gate [24]. Trapped-ion entangling gates utilize the shared mo- tional modes of two or more ions as a bus for trans- ferring quantum information among ions, with a few single-qubit rotations required to transform such an op- eration on two qubits into a CNOT. Several schemes to perform these two-qubit gates have been proposed [2, 25, 26] and demonstrated with high ﬁdelity for both hyperﬁne qubits [27] and optical qubits [8]. The demon- strated single- and two-qubit gates combine to achieve a universal gate set for quantum computation. Typ- ical single-qubit gate times are on the order of a few microseconds, with two-qubit gate times typically 10– 100 µs (though some have been performed faster). The achieved gate ﬁdelities are suﬃcient to be compatible with error-correction schemes such as the surface code [10]. Meanwhile, ion coherence times are much longer than gate times, with achieved values—depending upon qubit type—ranging from 0.2 s in optical qubits [28] to up to 600 s for hyperﬁne qubits [29, 30]. The combination of long coherence times and a universal set of quantum gates thus fulﬁlls the remaining two of DiVincenzo’s cri- teria. DiVincenzo’s original paper also speciﬁed two addi- tional criteria for quantum communications purposes: the ability to interconvert between stationary and so- called “ﬂying” qubits (which would likely be photons with quantum information encoded in polarization, fre- quency, or phase), and the ability to transmit these ﬂy- ing qubits from one location to another with high ﬁ- delity. These criteria are not essential if the goal is to build a stationary large-scale quantum computer, but would be necessary for some other applications includ- ing quantum networks. Furthermore, some proposals for realizing a quantum processor rely on photonic in- terconnects between medium-scale modules of trapped ions [31]. Ions themselves—although they may be “shut- tled” around the surface of a microfabricated trap—are unlikely to themselves be the ﬂying qubits used for long- distance quantum communication or quantum networks, but high-ﬁdelity entanglement between ions and photons has been demonstrated [32]. In summary, ions satisfy the ﬁve main DiVincenzo cri- teria for QC and the ability to transfer their quantum in- formation to ﬂying qubits has also been achieved. In fact, all of these criteria for trapped-ion qubits have essentially been satisﬁed since 2004 [26, 32], yet the largest fully- controlled quantum register of trapped ions has contained only 20 ions [33]. As with other qubit technologies, it has become clear that—in any practical sense—there are other criteria which must be fulﬁlled to make trapped- ion quantum computers scalable; these additional criteria are discussed in Section I E below. D. Pros and Cons of T rapped Ions as Qubits Trapped ions are recognized as having several advan- tages over competing qubit modalities. One of these is 4 their coherence times, which can be exceptionally long for all four types of qubits enumerated above. Hyperﬁne qubit coherence times as high as 50 s have been achieved without using spin-echo or other dynamical decoupling techniques [34] and, as mentioned in Sec. I C, such co- herence times were extended up to 600 s with the aid of dynamical decoupling [29, 30]. These coherence times are eﬀectively T2 times, limited by technical sources of dephasing rather than by the fundamental state lifetime. With two-qubit gate times of typically 1 to 100 µs, even the achieved coherence times represent ratios of coher- ence time to gate time of ∼106, a far higher ratio than has been achieved for superconducting qubits ( ∼1000) [35] or for Rydberg atom qubits (∼200) [36]. Another advantage is that both single and two-qubit gates can be implemented with very high ﬁdelity using trapped ions. Single-qubit rotations, with ﬁdelities as high as 99 .9999% have been achieved [22], which sur- passes the performance of any other modality. In addi- tion, two-qubit entangling gates have been demonstrated with ﬁdelities as high as 99 .9% for hyperﬁne qubits [27, 37] and 99 .6% for optical qubits [38], with only su- perconducting qubits achieving comparable performance. State preparation and readout are also straightforward for trapped ions. The use of lasers for measurement en- abled readout ﬁdelity greater than 99 .99% in less than 200 µs detection time [9] and 99 .93% in 11 µs [23]. Ad- ditionally, combined laser-based state preparation and readout with 99.93% ﬁdelity was demonstrated [22], from which state preparation errors of 2× 10−4 were inferred. The achieved initialization and readout ﬁdelities are bet- ter than those demonstrated in any other qubit technol- ogy. Trapped ions also beneﬁt from the fact that all ions of a given species and isotope are fundamentally identical. Thus, the microwave or laser frequency required to ad- dress each ion in the system will be the same and each ion will have the same coherence time. This improves the reproducibility of the qubits and limits the number of cal- ibration steps which are required at the beginning of the computation when compared with technologies such as superconducting qubits. This is because the supercon- ducting qubit frequencies and coherence times are de- ﬁned and aﬀected by fabrication and so will vary slightly from qubit to qubit due to fabrication process variabil- ity; these properties in superconducting qubits have also been observed to vary with thermal cycling [39]. At the same time, taking advantage of the beneﬁt of the iden- tical nature of ions requires that spatially-varying exter- nal perturbations to the trapped-ion qubit (such as mag- netic ﬁeld inhomogeneities, Stark shifts, or decoherence- inducing noise) be minimized or trapped-ion qubits at diﬀerent locations will de facto have diﬀerent frequencies or coherence times. While any ion contains additional internal states be- yond the simplistic structure shown in Fig 1, the num- ber of additional levels that must be accounted for in performing quantum operations is small when compared with the continuum of additional states that exist in solid-state qubits. While this additional ion internal structure must be accounted for when performing a quantum computation, the existence of some additional states—such as a short-lifetime state which can be used for readout—is a useful feature. At the same time, oﬀ- resonant light shifts and photon scattering can degrade quantum operations, and there is often the possibility that the ion becomes trapped in an undesirable internal state, one other than the cycling transition or|0⟩ and|1⟩ states (i.e. a leakage error occurs). Additional repump- ing lasers are needed to reinitialize the ion into the |0⟩ state, which add to the complexity of the system. As mentioned previously, an ion can be trapped for many hours, or in some cases up to months for heavier ion species in deep traps, without being lost. While these lifetimes are long, they are not inﬁnite and, as a result, the need to reload lost ions and to correct for compu- tation errors due to their loss is a complication when compared with some modalities. However, some other promising QC modalities, including Rydberg atoms in optical lattices, suﬀer from much shorter lifetimes. While trapped ions have demonstrated the highest ra- tio of coherence time to gate operation time for any qubit technology, their absolute gate speeds are much slower than those of some other types of qubits. High-ﬁdelity two-qubit gates for trapped ions have been demonstrated as fast as 1 .6 µs [40], but two-qubit gates in supercon- ducting qubits have been performed in tens of nanosec- o