FILE: 1904.06560v5.pdf
PAGES: 67
TITLE_GUESS: A Quantum Engineer’s Guide to Superconducting Qubits
ABSTRACT_EXTRACT:
[not found]
FIRST_PAGES_TEXT:
∗ A Quantum Engineer’s Guide to Superconducting Qubits P. Krantz1,2,†, M. Kjaergaard 1, F. Yan 1, T.P. Orlando 1, S. Gustavsson 1, and W. D. Oliver 1,3,‡ 1Research Laboratory of Electronics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA 2Wallenberg Centre for Quantum Technology (W ACQT), Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg, SE-41296, Sweden and 3MIT Lincoln Laboratory, 244 Wood Street, Lexington, MA 02420, USA (Dated: 9 July 2021) The aim of this review is to provide quantum engineers with an introductory guide to the central concepts and challenges in the rapidly accelerating ﬁeld of superconducting quantum circuits. Over the past twenty years, the ﬁeld has matured from a predominantly basic research endeavor to one that increasingly explores the engineering of larger-scale superconducting quantum systems. Here, we review several foundational elements – qubit design, noise properties, qubit control, and readout techniques – developed during this period, bridging fundamental concepts in circuit quantum electrodynamics (cQED) and contemporary, state- of-the-art applications in gate-model quantum computation. CONTENTS I. Introduction 2 A. Organization of this article 2 II. Engineering quantum circuits 3 A. From quantum harmonic oscillator to the transmon qubit 3 B. Qubit Hamiltonian engineering 6 1. Tunable qubit: split transmon 6 2. Towards larger anharmonicity: ﬂux qubit and ﬂuxonium 7 C. Interaction Hamiltonian engineering 9 1. Physical coupling: capacitive and inductive 9 2. Coupling axis: transverse and longitudinal 10 III. Noise, decoherence, and error mitigation 12 A. Types of noise 12 1. Systematic noise 12 2. Stochastic noise 12 3. Noise strength and qubit susceptibility 12 B. Modeling noise and decoherence 12 1. Bloch sphere representation 12 2. Bloch-Redﬁeld model of decoherence 13 3. Modiﬁcation due to 1 /f-type noise 16 4. Noise power spectral density (PSD) 17 C. Common examples of noise 18 1. Charge noise 18 2. Magnetic ﬂux noise 18 3. Photon number ﬂuctuations 19 4. Quasiparticles 19 D. Operator form of qubit-environment interaction 19 ∗†philipk@mit.edu,‡william.oliver@mit.edu 1. Connecting T1 to S(ω) 19 2. Connecting Tϕ to S(ω) 20 3. Noise spectroscopy 21 E. Engineering noise mitigation 21 1. Materials and fabrication improvements 22 2. Design improvements 22 3. Dynamical error suppression 22 4. Cryogenic engineering 22 IV. Qubit control 22 A. Boolean logic gates used in classical computers 23 B. Quantum logic gates used in quantum computers 24 C. Comparing classical and quantum gates 26 1. Gate sets and gate synthesis 27 2. Addressing superconducting qubits 27 D. Single-qubit gates 27 1. Capacitive coupling for X,Y control 28 2. Virtual Z gate 30 3. The DRAG scheme 30 E. The iSWAP two-qubit gate in tunable qubits 31 1. Deriving the iSWAP unitary 31 2. Applications of the iSWAP gate 33 F. The CPHASE two-qubit gate in tunable qubits 33 1. Trajectory design for the CPHASE gate 35 2. The CPHASE gate for quantum error correction 35 3. Quantum simulation and algorithm demonstrations using CPHASE 36 G. Two-qubit gates using only microwaves 37 1. The operational principle of the CR gate 37 2. Improvements to the CR gate and quantum error correction experiments using CR 38 3. Quantum simulation and algorithm demonstrations with the CR gate 38 arXiv:1904.06560v5 [quant-ph] 7 Jul 2021 2 4. Other microwave-only gates: bSWAP, MAP, and RIP 39 H. Gate implementations with tunable coupling 40 V. Qubit readout 41 A. Dispersive readout 41 B. Measuring the resonator amplitude and phase 43 1. Representation of the readout signal 43 2. I-Q mixing 44 3. Homodyne demodulation 44 4. Heterodyne demodulation 45 C. Weak and strong qubit measurements: Impact of noise 46 D. “Purcell ﬁlters” for faster readout 48 E. Improve signal-to-noise ratio: Parametric ampliﬁcation 50 1. Quantum-limited ampliﬁcation processes 50 2. Operation of Josephson parametric ampliﬁers 51 3. The traveling wave parametric ampliﬁer 53 VI. Summary and outlook 54 Acknowledgments 55 I. INTRODUCTION Quantum processors harness the intrinsic properties of quantum mechanical systems – such as quantum paral- lelism and quantum interference – to solve certain prob- lems where classical computers fall short 1–6. Over the past two decades, rapid developments in the science and engineering of quantum systems have advanced the fron- tier in quantum computation, from the realm of scien- tiﬁc explorations on single isolated quantum systems to- ward the creation and manipulation of multi-qubit pro- cessors7,8. In particular, the requirements imposed by larger quantum processors have shifted of mindset within the community, from solely scientiﬁc discovery to the de- velopment of new, foundational engineering abstractions associated with the design, control, and readout of multi- qubit quantum systems. The result is the emergence of a new discipline termed quantum engineering, which serves to bridge the basic sciences, mathematics, and computer science with ﬁelds generally associated with traditional engineering. One prominent platform for constructing a multi-qubit quantum processor involves superconducting qubits, in which information is stored in the quantum degrees of freedom of nanofabricated, anharmonic oscillators con- structed from superconducting circuit elements. In con- trast to other platforms, e.g. electron spins in sili- con9–14 and quantum dots 15–18, trapped ions 19–23, ul- tracold atoms24–27, nitrogen-vacancies in diamonds 28,29, and polarized photons30–33, where the quantum informa- tion is encoded in natural microscopic quantum systems, superconducting qubits are macroscopic in size and litho- graphically deﬁned. One remarkable feature of superconducting qubits is that their energy-level spectra are governed by circuit el- ement parameters and thus are conﬁgurable; they can be designed to exhibit “atom-like” energy spectra with de- sired properties. Therefore, superconducting qubits are also often referred to as artiﬁcial atoms , oﬀering a rich parameter space of possible qubit properties and opera- tion regimes, with predictable performance in terms of transition frequencies, anharmonicity, and complexity. While there are many other excellent reviews on su- perconducting qubits, see e.g. Refs. 34–43, this work speciﬁcally aims to introduce new quantum engineers (academic and industrial alike) to the terminology and state-of-the-art practices used in the rapidly accelerat- ing ﬁeld of superconducting quantum computing. The reader is assumed to be familiar with basic concepts that span classical physics, quantum mechanics, and electrical engineering. In particular, readers will ﬁnd it useful to have had previous exposure to classical mechanics, the Schr¨ odinger equation, the Bloch sphere representation of qubit states, second quantization, basic concepts of su- perconductivity, electromagnetism, introductory circuit analysis, classical boolean logic, linear dynamical sys- tems, analog and digital signal processing, and famil- iarity with microwave components such as transmission lines and mixers. These topics will be introduced as they arise, but having basic prior knowledge will be helpful. A. Organization of this article This review is organized in the following four sections; ﬁrst, in Sec. II, we explore the parameter space avail- able when designing superconducting circuits. In particu- lar, we look at the promising capacitively-shunted planar qubit modalities and how these can be engineered with desired properties, such as transition frequency, anhar- monicity, and reduced susceptibility to various sources of noise. In this section, we also introduce several ways in which interactions between qubits can be engineered, in order to implement two-qubit entangling operations, needed for a universal gate set. In Sec. III, we discuss systematic and stochastic noise, the concepts of noise strength and qubit noise suscepti- bility, and the common sources of noise which lead to decoherence in superconducting circuits. We introduce the Bloch-Redﬁeld model of decoherence, characterized by longitudinal and transverse relaxation times T1 and T2, and discuss the implications of 1 /f noise. We then deﬁne the noise power spectral density, which is com- monly used to characterize noise processes, and describe how it drives decoherence. Finally, we close the section with a review of coherent control methods used to miti- gate certain types of coherence, reversible noise. 3 In Sec. IV, we provide a review of how single- and two-qubit operations are typically implemented in super- conducing circuits, by using a combination of local mag- netic ﬂux control and microwave drives. In particular, we discuss the family of two-qubit gates arising from a ca- pacitive coupling between qubits, and introduce several recent advances that have been demonstrated to achieve high-ﬁdelity gates, as well as applications in quantum information processing that use these gates. The contin- ued development of high-ﬁdelity two-qubit gates in super- conducting qubits is a highly active research area. For this reason, we include suﬃcient technical details that a reader may use this review as a starting point to critically assess the pros and cons of the various gates, as well as develop an appreciation for the types of gate-engineering already implemented in state-of-the-art superconducting quantum processors. Finally, in Sec. V, we discuss the physics and engi- neering associated with the dispersive readout technique, typically used to measure the individual qubit states in modern quantum processors. After a discussion of the theory behind dispersive coupling, we give an introduc- tion to design of Purcell ﬁlters and the development of quantum-limited parametric ampliﬁers. II. ENGINEERING QUANTUM CIRCUITS In this section, we will demonstrate how quantum sys- tems based on superconducting circuits can be engineered to achieve certain desired properties. Using the most common qubit modalities, we discuss how properties such as the qubit transition frequency, anharmonicity, and noise susceptibility can be tailored by the choice of circuit topology and element parameter values. We also discuss how to engineer the interactions between diﬀerent quan- tum systems, in particular the cases of qubit-qubit and qubit-resonator couplings. A. From quantum harmonic oscillator to the transmon qubit A quantum mechanical system is governed by the time- dependent Schr¨ odinger equation, ˆH|ψ(t)⟩ = iℏ ∂ ∂t|ψ(t)⟩, (1) where|ψ(t)⟩ is the state of the quantum system at time t, ℏ is the reduced Planck’s constant h/2π, and ˆH is the Hamiltonian that describes the total energy of the sys- tem. The “hat” is used to indicate that ˆH is a quantum operator. As the Schr¨ odinger equation is a ﬁrst-order lin- ear diﬀerential equation, the temporal dynamics of the quantum system may be viewed as a straightforward ex- ample of a linear dynamical system with formal solution, |ψ(t)⟩ = e−i ˆHt/ℏ|ψ(0)⟩. (2) The time-independent Hamiltonian ˆH governs the time evolution of the system through the operator e−i ˆHt/ℏ. Thus, just as with classical systems, determining the Hamiltonian of a system – whether the classical Hamil- tonian H or its quantum counterpart ˆH – is the ﬁrst step to deriving its dynamical behavior. In Sec. IV, we con- sider the case when the Hamiltonian is time-dependent in the context of qubit control. To understand the dynamics of a superconducting qubit circuit, it is natural to start with the classical de- scription of a linear LC resonant circuit [Fig. 1(a)]. In this system, energy oscillates between electrical energy in the capacitor C and magnetic energy in the inductor L. In the following, we will arbitrarily associate the elec- trical energy with the “kinetic energy” and the magnetic energy with the “potential energy” of the oscillator. The instantaneous, time-dependent energy in each element is derived from its current and voltage, E(t) =  t −∞ V (t′)I(t′)dt′, (3) where V (t′) and I(t′) denote the voltage and current of the capacitor or inductor. To derive the classical Hamiltonian, we follow the stan- dard approach used in classical mechanics: the Lagrange- Hamilton formulation. Here, we represent the circuit el- ements in terms of one of its generalized circuit coor- dinates, charge or ﬂux. In the following, we pick ﬂux, deﬁned as the time integral of the voltage Φ(t) =  t −∞ V (t′)dt′. (4) In this example, the voltage at the node is also the branch voltage across the element. In this section, we will simply refer to these as node voltages and ﬂuxes for convenience. For a more detailed discussion of nodes and branches in this context, we refer the reader to Ref. 44. Note that in the following, we could have exchanged our associations with kinetic energy (momentum coor- dinate) and potential energy (position coordinate), and instead start with the charge variable Q(t), which is the time integral of the current I(t). By combining Eqs. (3) and (4), using the relationsV = L dI/dt and I = C dV /dt, and applying the integration by parts formula, we can write down energy terms for the capacitor and inductor in terms of the node ﬂux, TC = 1 2 C ˙Φ2, (5) UL = 1 2LΦ2. (6) The Lagrangian is deﬁned as the diﬀerence between the kinetic and potential energy terms and can thus be expressed in terms of Eqs. (5) and (6) 4 L =TC−U L = 1 2 C ˙Φ2− 1 2LΦ2. (7) From the Lagrangian in Eq. (7), we can further derive the Hamiltonian using the Legendre transformation, for which we need to calculate the momentum conjugate to the ﬂux, which in this case is the charge on the capacitor Q = ∂L ∂ ˙Φ = C ˙Φ. (8) The Hamiltonian of the system is now deﬁned as H = Q ˙Φ−L = Q2 2C + Φ2 2L≡ 1 2 CV 2 + 1 2 LI2, (9) as one would expect for an electrical LC circuit. Note that this Hamiltonian is analogous to that of a mechan- ical harmonic oscillator, with mass m = C, and reso- nant frequency ω = 1 / √ LC, which expressed in posi- tion, x, and momentum, p, coordinates takes the form H = p2/2m + mω2x2/2. The Hamiltonian described above is classical. In order to proceed to a quantum-mechanical description of the system, we need to promote the charge and ﬂux coordi- nates to quantum operators. And, whereas the classical coordinates satisfy the Poisson bracket: {f, g} = δf δΦ δg δQ− δg δΦ δf δQ (10) →{ Φ, Q} = δΦ δΦ δQ δQ− δQ δΦ δΦ δQ = 1− 0 = 1, (11) the quantum operators similarly satisfy a commutation relation: [ˆΦ, ˆQ] = ˆΦ ˆQ− ˆQˆΦ = iℏ, (12) where the operators are indicated by hats. From this point forward, however, the hats on operators will be omitted for simplicity. In a simple LC resonant circuit [Fig. 1(a)], both the inductor L and the capacitor C are linear circuit ele- ments. Deﬁning the reduced ﬂux φ≡ 2πΦ/Φ0 and the reduced charge n = Q/2e, we can write down the follow- ing quantum-mechanical Hamiltonian for the circuit, H = 4ECn2 + 1 2 ELφ2, (13) where EC = e2/(2C) is the charging energy required to add each electron of the Cooper-pair to the island and EL = (Φ 0/2π)2/L is the inductive energy, where Φ0 = h/(2e) is the superconducting magnetic ﬂux quan- tum. Moreover, the quantum operator n is the ex- cess number of Cooper-pairs on the island, and φ – the reduced ﬂux – is denoted the “gauge-invariant phase” across the inductor. These two operators form a canon- ical conjugate pair, obeying the commutation relation [φ, n] = i. We note that the factor 4 in front of the charging energy EC is solely a historical artifact, namely, that this energy scale was ﬁrst deﬁned for single-electron systems and then adopted to two-electron Cooper-pair systems. The Hamiltonian in Eq. (13) is identical to the one de- scribing a particle in a one-dimensional quadratic poten- tial, a quantum harmonic oscillator (QHO). We can treat φ as the generalized position coordinate, so that the ﬁrst term is the kinetic energy and the second term is the po- tential energy. We emphasize that the functional form of the potential energy inﬂuences the eigensolutions. For example, the fact that this term is quadratic ( UL∝ φ2) in Eq. (13) gives rise to the shape of the potential in Fig. 1(b). The solution to this eigenvalue problem gives an in- ﬁnite series of eigenstates|k⟩, (k = 0, 1, 2, . . .), whose cor- responding eigenenergies Ek are all equidistantly spaced, i.e. Ek+1−Ek = ℏωr, where ωr =√8ELEC/ℏ = 1/ √ LC denotes the resonant frequency of the system, see Fig. 1(b). We may represent these results in a more compact form (second quantization) for the quantum harmonic oscillator (QHO) Hamiltonian H = ℏωr ( a†a + 1 2 ) , (14) where a†(a) is the creation (annihilation) operator of a single excitation of the resonator. The Hamiltonian in Eq. (14) is written as an energy. It is, however, often preferred to divide by ℏ so that the expression has units of radian frequency, since we will later resonantly drive transitions at a particular frequency or reference the rate at which two systems interact with one another. There- fore, from here on, ℏ will be omitted. The original charge number and phase operators can be expressed as n = nzpf×i(a−a†) and φ = φzpf×(a+a†), where nzpf = [ EL/(32EC)]1/4 and φzpf = (2 EC/EL)1/4 are the zero-point ﬂuctuations of the charge and phase variables, respectively. Quantum mechanically, the quan- tum states are represented as wavefunctions that are gen- erally distributed over a range of values of n and φ and, consequently, the wavefunctions have non-zero standard deviations. Such wavefunction distributions are referred to as “quantum ﬂuctuations,” and they exist, even in the ground state, where they are called “zero-point ﬂuctua- tions” . The linear characteristics of the QHO has a natural limitation in its applications for processing quantum in- formation. Before the system can be used as a qubit, we need to be able to deﬁne a computational subspace con- sisting of only two energy states (usually the two-lowest energy eigenstates) in between which