FILE: Here__there_and_everywhere_-_The_Economist.pdf
PAGES: 53
TITLE_GUESS: 10/10/20, 21:22Here, there and everywhere | The Economist
ABSTRACT_EXTRACT:
[not found]
FIRST_PAGES_TEXT:
10/10/20, 21:22Here, there and everywhere | The Economist Page 1 of 54https://www.economist.com/news/essays/21717782-quantum-technology-beginning-come-its-own Quantum technology is beginning to come into its own After decades as laboratory curiosities, some of quantum physics’ oddest effects are beginning to be put to use, says Jason Palmer PATRICK GILL, a director of the new Quantum Metrology Institute at Britain’s National Physical Laboratory (NPL) in south-west London and an expert in atomic clocks, points to a large table full of lenses and mirrors, vacuum chambers and electronics. “And there’s a smaller one over there,” he says. NPL is part of a consortium of the planet’s ofﬁcial TECHNOLOGY QUARTERLY HERE, THERE AND EVERYWHERE 10/10/20, 21:22Here, there and everywhere | The Economist Page 2 of 54https://www.economist.com/news/essays/21717782-quantum-technology-beginning-come-its-own timekeepers. In all its atomic-clock laboratories, each of the ﬂagship devices—some of which are huge—is ﬂanked by a smaller one under construction. Miniaturisation is the name of the game. Here is one that ﬁts into a standard electronics rack, 19 inches wide. Over there is a ﬁst- sized gizmo designed to hold an atomic clock’s precious innards safe within a satellite. The caesium atomic clock, developed at NPL, was arguably the world’s ﬁrst quantum technology, though it was not labelled as such. The most common approach, ﬁrst used in 1950, works by putting energy into atoms to create a “superposition” in which they are, in a measurable way, in more than one energy state at the same time —both excited and relaxed. Probing this strange condition reveals the “clock frequency” of those atoms—a constant for clocks on every continent, and the basis for a precise, internationally agreed deﬁnition of the second. After decades of work in the laboratory, a raft of different devices and approaches relying on quantum-mechanical effects are now nearing market-readiness. It has taken so long mainly because the components that make them up had to be developed ﬁrst: ever-better lasers, 10/10/20, 21:22Here, there and everywhere | The Economist Page 3 of 54https://www.economist.com/news/essays/21717782-quantum-technology-beginning-come-its-own semiconductors, control electronics and techniques to achieve the low temperatures at which many quantum systems perform best. Britain did not exploit the atomic clock’s discovery in the market. Instead, a year after the device was invented, it was commercialised by the National Company, an American ﬁrm. Given the potential of these new quantum technologies, this time commercialisation is on many minds. The NPL’s ever-smaller clocks are just one step towards marketable products that could vastly outdo GPS (which itself is an application of atomic timekeeping) in navigation, or help spot what lies underground. The era of quantum technology is almost here. The odds are good; the goods, odd Everything in the natural world can be described by quantum mechanics. Born a century ago, this theory is the rule book for what happens at atomic scales, providing explanations for everything from the layout of the periodic table to the zoo of particles spraying out of atom-smashers. It has guided the development of everyday technologies from lasers to MRI machines and put a solid foundation under astrophysicists’ musings about unknowables such as the interiors of black holes and the dawn of the 10/10/20, 21:22Here, there and everywhere | The Economist Page 4 of 54https://www.economist.com/news/essays/21717782-quantum-technology-beginning-come-its-own universe. Revealed by a few surprising discoveries, such as that atoms absorb and emit energy only in packets of discrete sizes (quanta), and that light and matter can act as both waves and particles, it is modern physics’ greatest triumph. It has a weird side, though, and it is this that has captured interest in what is now being called the second quantum revolution. The ﬁrst one was about physics: about understanding how the world worked at the tiny scales where quantum mechanics rules. Not only can particles be in two states at once, as with the atoms in an atomic clock; sometimes two of them, separated by a great distance, seemingly sense something about each other’s condition, a situation called entanglement. A particle’s exact position or state is never certain until a measurement is made; there are only higher or lower likelihoods of a given outcome, and the measurement changes the situation irrevocably. All this has been clear from the mathematics since the mid-1920s but was made manifest in laboratory experiments only later in the 20th century. As the theory’s more straightforward predictions were put to use, for instance in electronics, quantum mechanics gained a reputation for being counterintuitive, even downright spooky.