
Last week, we discussed several topics
related to quantum Hamiltonians simulation,
including methods like Trotterization,
phase estimation, and variational quantum
eigensolvers.
This week, we'll turn our attention
to quantum optimization algorithms.
Optimization problems are ubiquitous,
from supply transport optimization
to sensor and satellite tasking, pattern recognition, et cetera.
Many, many important practical problems
can be reduced to satisfying, in an optimal manner,
as many constraints as possible.
We'll first discuss optimization problems
and their implementation on an adiabatic quantum computer.
We'll then turn our attention to quantum annealers, machines
that target classical optimization problems.
And lastly, we'll look at Grover's algorithm
and how it works.
And at the end of the week, you'll
implement Grover's algorithm for yourself
on the IBM Quantum Experience.
To get started, let's first hear from MIT professor Eddie Farhi
about adiabatic quantum computers and quantum
optimization algorithms.
Adiabatic quantum computing is a all-purpose approach
to solving combinatorial optimization problems,
or generally for finding the minimum
of an objective function, using a quantum computer.
And we know that all systems in nature
obey the Schrodinger equation.
It's a first-order differential equation,
which says that the rate of change of the wave function
is proportional to the Hamiltonian operator
times the wave function.
So adiabatic quantum computing uses the Schrodinger equation
as the basis of the algorithm.
It's distinct from the gate model in that sense,
because we're going to have continuous time evolution.
The quantum state is going to change continuously, as opposed
to the gate model, where we have sequences
of discrete transformations, which update the state.
Of course, they're really very closely related.
But in this case, I think it's a lot easier
to think about how the algorithm works
if we think in the context of the continuous time evolution.
Let me try to give you a feel for how
the adiabatic algorithm works.
We want to find the minimum of a complicated cost function.
And in general, of course, there's
no all-purpose algorithm that will guarantee
finding the minimum of any cost function in all circumstances.
Though we're really trying to find something which
we hope will work well in practice in situations
we care about.
So the idea is this.
The minimum of the cost function,
we're going to attempt to find by encoding the cost function
in a quantum Hamiltonian.
We're going to take a quantum Hamiltonian,
whose ground state-- that's its lowest energy state we know--
and we're going to prepare the quantum
system in the ground state of this known Hamiltonian.
Sometimes we call that the beginning Hamiltonian.
If you look at this equation here,
you see that our Hamiltonian that
controls the evolution of the system
has two parts, the beginning Hamiltonian and the problem
Hamiltonian.
Now, we're going to start the system off
in the ground state of the beginning Hamiltonian,
because the beginning Hamiltonian is
something we know how to construct,
and we know its ground state.
And then what we're going to do is slowly turn off
the beginning Hamiltonian and slowly
turn on the problem Hamiltonian.
So we're going to go from one to the other slowly.
But the problem Hamiltonian has been constructed
so that its ground state encodes the solution
to the minimization problem, which is our goal.
And we're going to take the system,
and we're going to slowly change the Hamiltonian as the state
evolves, according to the Schrodinger
equation, the first equation I showed you.
Let me give you a little example of how this might work.
Suppose that I put a little ball in my hand.
And it's just sitting there.
Imagine it in your mind's eye.
And it's sitting in a-- it's in the minimum of a potential
well formed by my hand.
Now I slowly move my hand.
And the little ball, as you can see in your mind's eye,
stays right there in my hand.
And what's happened in that case is
that I am changing the physical system,
and I'm dragging along the minimum energy configuration.
Now, suppose that I put that little ball there,
and I jerked my hand.
The ball would fall away.
So if I let my hand go slowly enough,
I'll drag along the little ball.
And the quantum system works in a very similar fashion.
If you put a quantum state in the ground
state of Hamiltonian, and then you slowly change
the Hamiltonian, if you go slowly enough,
the ground state of the Hamiltonian that is changing
will correspond to the evolving quantum state.
In other words, we can shlep the ground state
from the ground state of the beginning Hamiltonian
to the ground state of the problem Hamiltonian,
if we go slowly enough.
And that means that we have a way
of finding the ground state, which corresponds
to the minimum energy configuration,
or the lowest value or the cost function that we sought.
This will work, for sure, if you go infinitely slowly.
Now, infinitely slowly requires an infinite amount of time.
And so that's not a practical algorithm.
So the real question becomes, can we
go slowly enough but not so slowly that it's impractical,
that we can actually bring our system to the place we want?
