GABRIEL SAMACH: In the previous videos this week,
we discussed a paradigm of quantum computing known
as adiabatic quantum computation.
In this video, we're going to introduce
another related quantum computing paradigm called
quantum annealing.
As we'll see, quantum annealing bears many similarities
to adiabatic quantum computation,
though with a few key differences.
First, recall that adiabatic quantum computation is a form
of analog quantum computing.
That is, rather than digitizing our computation
into discrete gates, AQC relies on the continuous transition
of a quantum system from the ground state of one Hamiltonian
to the ground state of another.
While it's true that adiabatic quantum computation is
a provably viable method of universal quantum computation,
AQC presents a serious practical challenge.
In order for the computation to succeed,
the system must remain in the ground state for the duration
of the computation.
If the evolution is not truly adiabatic
and the system ends up in an excited
state at the end of the protocol, the computation fails.
Unfortunately, this is an extremely hard condition
to avoid in any realistic quantum computer.
To see this, let's consider what the energy levels of our system
might look like as we perform our computation.
In particular, let's focus on the energy gap
between the ground state of our system and its first excited
state.
As the Hamiltonian of the system changes
over the course of the computation,
the gap between our ground and excited states
also changes, and in general, it can become very small.
This is where the trouble starts.
For any physical system at a finite temperature,
the environment around our qubits
will generate thermal photons with energy proportional
to the temperature of the environment.
When these photons encounter our qubits, their energy is absorbed
and our system has some probability
of being excited to a higher state.
The smaller the gap with respect to the photon energy,
the higher the probability that an excitation will occur.
If we want to reduce the probability of an excitation
occurring for a fixed gap size, we need a cooler system
to a temperature much lower than the energy gap
between our qubit states.
This is precisely why we operate superconducting qubits
in a dilution refrigerator, cooled
to a temperature of around 10 millikelvin.
For typical superconducting qubits,
the gap between the states of our bare qubits
is on the order of 5 gigahertz, which
corresponds to a temperature of around 250 millikelvin.
By operating our qubits in an environment in order
of magnitude colder than this, we dramatically
reduce the probability of an unintentional excitation
occurring during a computation.
Unfortunately, as we change the Hamiltonian
during an adiabatic quantum computation,
new avoided crossings will open up
between our states, which can be much
smaller than the energy gaps between our bare qubit states.
If we want to avoid transitioning
across these small gaps in the case,
say, of a superconducting annealer,
we would need to engineer a refrigerator which
operates much colder than 10 millikelvin, which
is not practical given current cryogenic technology.
And this type of problem generalizes for other qubit
technologies as well.
Furthermore, there's a second problem.
As we evolve our computer through a small gap region,
if we sweep through the gap too quickly,
we can effectively jump to the excited state.
This is called a Landau-Zener transition.
So even if we could operate our computer at 0 temperature,
we would need to evolve the system sufficiently slowly
to accommodate smaller and smaller gaps,
and thereby increase the time to solution.
So although adiabatic quantum computation can in principle
be universal, it has major drawbacks
related to the small gap sizes that
occur at larger problem sizes.
Given this reality, it's natural to ask,
what happens if we allow the computer to leave the ground
state during the evolution?
Can it return back to the ground state, or even a lower excited
state through quantum tunneling and relaxation processes?
And more importantly, is leaving the ground state
consistent with quantum enhanced operation?
In fact, quantum annealing is basically an adiabatic quantum
computer that has left its ground state at some point
during the evolution.
And conceptually, a combination of quantum tunneling
and relaxation processes are leveraged to allow the computer
to return to its ground state, or at the very
least, a lower energy state.
However, to date, there is no proof or evidence
that the quantum and dissipative dynamics
present in quantum annealing could
afford a quantum enhancement for a general class of problems.
This remains an open research question.
Much like AQC, the principle of quantum annealing
involves evolving a quantum state
according to some time-dependent Hamiltonian,
such that the state of the system
at the end of the computation encodes the result
of the problem of interest.
However, unlike AQC, which is universal and can
in principle implement any quantum algorithm,
quantum annealing is designed to only solve
a particular class of computations
known as classical optimization problems.
We deal with classical optimization
problems in every industry and throughout our daily lives.
For example, what's the best portfolio
of stocks to maximize return on investment?
What's the best fighter jet designed to minimize drag?
Or to use a more mundane example, what's
the best path home from work?
The key to an optimization problem
is that there are many potentially viable answers
to a given problem.
For example, there are many paths which will take you home
from your office.
The goal of an optimization problem
is to find the most efficient solution from amongst all
the possible solutions.
We quantify this by introducing a cost function, which
tells us the relative efficiency of each solution.
For our commute home, our cost function
could be the time it takes to get home if we
followed a particular route.
Or alternatively, it could be the amount of gas we use.
Whatever we are optimizing against,
the optimal solution tells us the one that
minimizes our cost function.
And although there may be a truly optimal solution,
it's very often the case that there
are several nearly optimal solutions that
are all in practice very good.
Commutes that differ by a few meters on 10 kilometers,
or differ by a few drops of gas on a liter
are essentially interchangeable.
And the hope is for these kinds of problems,
leaving the ground state may be OK,
provided we end up in a reasonably low energy state.
To map an optimization problem onto a quantum annealing
problem, we make use of a particular Hamiltonian
known as an Ising Hamiltonian.
The Ising Hamiltonian was first formulated
in the context of quantum magnetism between atomic spins.
For a system of physical spin 1/2 particles,
the Ising Hamiltonian tells us the energy of the spins as they
interact with external magnetic fields,
plus the energy of the magnetic interactions between pairs
of spins.
So how can this physics problem be used for optimization?
As it turns out, we can use the Ising Hamiltonian
to encode so-called classical optimization problems.
By choosing the right combination
of interaction strings between spins,
we can mimic the cost function of the problem
we're interested in.
When we encode this optimization problem into our Ising
Hamiltonian, we then find that the energy levels
of our Hamiltonian correspond to the different possible solutions
to our optimization problem, with the energy of each level
corresponding to the value of the cost function
for that particular solution.
Higher energies incur higher penalties.
The goal of quantum annealing is to engineer a system of qubits
with an Ising Hamiltonian, corresponding
to the optimization problem of interest.
We then want to evolve this system such
that it ends up in a lower energy
eigenstate of this Hamiltonian at the end of the computation.
The lower the energy of this final state,
the more optimal the solution.
To perform this evolution, we start
by initializing our system in the ground state
of a much simpler Hamiltonian.
Conventionally, this Hamiltonian is the sum of the x operator
acting on every qubit, which is analogous to having an array
of spin 1/2 particles in a global magnetic field pointing
transverse to the spins.
When you work out the math, you find
that the ground state of this Hamiltonian is straightforward.
It's the state where all the qubits
are in the plus x state on the equator of the Bloch sphere,
which is a relatively easy state to initialize our system in.
Once we prepare our system in the ground
state of this initial Hamiltonian,
we gradually reduce the strength of this initial Hamiltonian
and turn on the Hamiltonian, which encodes our optimization
problem.
In the ideal case, our system evolves adiabatically
and remains in the ground state throughout the evolution.
This would be an adiabatic quantum computer simulating
an Ising Hamiltonian.
Ideally, at the end of the evolution,
our system would still be in the ground state of our problem
Hamiltonian, corresponding to the solution which
minimizes our cost function.
In other words, we would find the absolute shortest route
home.
However, as we discussed at the beginning of this video,
it's very unlikely that we will remain in the ground state
throughout the computation.
This doesn't necessarily ruin our computation,
because every energy state of our problem Hamiltonian
corresponds to a possible solution.
Even if we exit the ground state and end up
in an excited state at the end of the computation,
this excited state may still give us a useful answer
to our optimization problem.
The question is, how good is this answer?
Unfortunately, while quantum annealing relaxes the constraint
that we stay in the ground state,
it makes no guarantees that the result we arrive at
is any more optimal, or any more efficiently found
than the result we might calculate
on a classical computer.
As such, unlike AQC, quantum annealing
can make no provable claim to either universality or quantum
enhancement, and there is no demonstration
to date of quantum enhancement for a class of optimization
problems.
That said, even if a quantum annealer ends up scaling
with problem size like a classical computer,
it may still be useful if it offers
a significant advantage over existing classical computing
alternatives.
However, this also has yet to be demonstrated.
Nonetheless, there is tremendous interest in quantum annealers
because optimization problems are ubiquitous.
As work gets underway to design the next generation of quantum
annealers, it remains an open question
if systems with higher quantum coherence and more
sophisticated qubit connectivity might demonstrate a truly
conclusive quantum enhancement.
