
Let's go back to the concept of adiabatic evolution,
but let's be a little bit more specific now.
So I want to imagine that we want
to find the minimum of a cost function, which
is defined over bit strings.
And that cost function is the sum of terms, each of which
depends on a subset of the bits and has a value of 1,
let's say, on certain assignments of those bits
in the subset and has the value 0 on other assignments.
For example, if an individual term might look at 2 bits
and it'll say, if the 2 bits agree in their value,
we're going to give it the value 1, but if they disagree,
the function has the value of 0.
So now, I want to imagine that my optimization problem is
to find the minimum of a function, which
is a sum of terms, each of which acts on a few bits.
And finding the minimum of such a function in general,
is what we call NP hard.
It's not believed that there's any kind of classical time
algorithm that can in polynomial time
solve that problem in general.
But nonetheless, we're going to attempt our quantum approach
to it.
So the first thing we're going to do
is to find what I told you before
was the problem Hamiltonian.
And the problem Hamiltonian we're
going to take to be diagonal in the computational basis,
so when the problem Hamiltonian acts on a ket with the string
z in it, it will give the value of the cost
function times the ket.
So it's diagonal in the computational basis.
And note that the minimum of the string that
achieves the minimum value of the cost
function we can view as the ground
state of this particular quantum Hamiltonian,
because it's diagonal in the computational basis.
Now, we need to take a beginning Hamiltonian too.
And from that we typically use is a magnetic field
in the x direction.
If you have a magnetic field on a single spin a half particle
and it's pointing in the x direction,
it's represented by the operator.
I'll take it to be minus sigma x,
so that the state that's in the x direction
is the minimum with the value minus 1.
So the Hamiltonian we're going to take for the beginning
Hamiltonian is the sum, a minus in front,
the sum of the sigma x is one for each qubit.
That's a very simple Hamiltonian.
And it's very easy to initialize a quantum state as the ground
state of that Hamiltonian, because all we have to do
is take our spins and line them up in the x direction.
Then we're automatically in the ground state of the beginning
Hamiltonian.
So now for all full evolution, we're
going to take a Hamiltonian that it interpolates
between the beginning Hamiltonian I prescribed
and the problem Hamiltonian.
So that's all very simple to write down.
And not only is it simple to write down,
it's easy to imagine even implementing such a thing
in the lab or on a quantum computer,
because the terms in the problem Hamiltonian
are a sum of local terms diagonal
in the computational basis.
And the beginning Hamiltonian is just a magnetic field
in the x direction.
So we can imagine actually building this thing.
And of course, that's what the D Wave company did do,
is build a machine that runs this algorithm.
And they actually chose to implement
the quantum adiabatic algorithm, because it
was simple to imagine building a device that could do that.
And of course, the way I've discussed it,
it's kind of an all purpose minimizer.
So we now have gone as far as to see
that we can have a specific implementation
of the adiabatic algorithm.
So what's the killer here?
What slows it down?
What's the thing that makes it hard to implement this
in reality and maybe means that it's hard to show the algorithm
works all the time?
And that has to do with how slowly you
have to go in order to be guaranteed
that you're going to go to the place you want to end up at.
And that slowness is actually determined by something
we call the minimum gap.
In the beginning Hamiltonian, we have a magnetic field
in the x direction.
If I flip a single spin, the energy
of that single spin goes from let's say minus 1 to plus 1.
So the energy difference is 2.
That's a big energy difference between the ground state
and the first excited state.
In the problem Hamiltonian, I told you
that all my terms were zeros and ones,
because the cost function, the way I happened to define it,
was a sum of terms, which were all 0 or 1.
So that means that the energy difference between the ground
state and the first excited state is let's
say, 1 or 2 maybe, but it's going to be an integer.
But as the system evolves, we can
track the ground state energy and the energy of the first
excited state.
And what we find in these situations is that as you
move along, the two approach each other,
coming very, very close.
And then they're going to spread out back to that integer
at the end.
And the question is, what's that value which
is the smallest energy difference
between the first excited state and the ground state?
We call that the gap.
And the runtime of the algorithm is determined by the gap.
In fact, the minimum runtime of the algorithm scales like 1
over the minimum gap squared.
That's just a little math fact, which we could establish.
So the whole issue from a physics point
of view in the adiabatic algorithm is, does the system,
as it evolve, does the energy difference
between the ground state and the first excited state
get too small?
Because if it's too small, the run time
required to stay in the ground state is too big.
So one of the things we have to study
when we think about adiabatic algorithms
is the gap between the first excited state and the ground
state as the system evolves.
