
We've already established I think throughout this class,
and most of you know that optimization is a key problem
in all of computer science.
Now let's get a little bit more specific
and think about what optimization means in terms
of combinatorial search.
There we have a problem defined on bit strings.
And we have clauses or constraints, which
look at subsets of the bits.
And for certain assignments of the bits,
those clauses are satisfied.
And for others they are not.
What we want to do in combinatorial optimization,
is find a string that can satisfy
as many clauses as possible.
Often you can't satisfy all the clauses.
Because the clauses have intrinsic contradictions,
so that assignments for one clause that satisfy it,
force other clauses to not be satisfied.
So the question then becomes, what
is the string that satisfies, let's say, as most clauses
as possible?
Now that's very ambitious.
Because satisfying the most clauses as possible
that's NP hard.
And if you could do that in general,
you would have a huge computer science breakthrough.
Most people believe that there could be no polynomial time
algorithm for that.
So instead, we're going to come back a little bit
and look for a string that satisfies many of the clauses,
or as many as the algorithm can produce.
So what we're looking for is a good solution, not
the best solution.
We're looking for a good string, not the best.
In that case, obviously if your good solution is very, very
close to the best, maybe it's as good as the best;
but if it's maybe a little off, it could still
be of great value to you.
And so what we're going to be talking about
is an algorithm that is an approximate optimizer.
It's looking for approximate solutions
in the sense I just said.
And we're going to try this with a quantum algorithm.
But the quantum algorithm is now not like in the adiabatic,
it's going to be based on a continuous time evolution.
But rather it's going to be in the gate model, which
means we're going to apply a sequence
of discrete unitary transformations
to an initial state, and then make a measurement,
and hope that that measurement gives a string that satisfies
a high fraction of the clauses that could be satisfied.
So in order to build this up, we need a few ingredients.
We need the initial state and the unitaries
that we're going to apply.
So let's think about that.
Well, for the initial state, what we're actually
going to take is all the spins lined up in the x direction.
And the reason we like that is you probably already know
that if your spin is in the x direction,
it's a uniform superposition of up and down in the z.
In other words, it's an equal combination of 0 and 1.
So if all your spins are lined up in the x direction,
your state is a uniform superposition
of all possible bit strings.
And that's kind of a good place to start.
Because you have everything in there when you begin,
in the computation basis.
Now we're going to apply two operators.
The first operator is going to depend on the actual operator
valued cost function.
The cost function acting on a string,
gives you the number of clauses satisfied by total that string.
That's an easy-to-compute function.
But I could promote that function to a quantum operator,
and that quantum operator acting on the ket labeled by the bit
string z, will be the function, which
is the number of satisfied clauses times the ket.
So this operator valued cost function
is diagonal of a computational basis
and it's easy to construct.
But it is a Hermitian operator.
And we would like to apply a unitary transformation that
depends on it.
So we're going to introduce a parameter, gamma.
And I'm going to write down the unitary
here, e to the minus i gamma times that cost function.
So this object is a unitary transformation,
which we can easily apply to any state.
And it depends on a parameter, gamma, which
I'll talk more about later.
Now the next operator, which I would like to apply-- again
there's a lot of room for choice here.
But I'm making a choice--
is going to depend on the operator, which I call
B, which is the sum of the sigma x's,
the sum of the Pauli operators in the x direction.
That's an operator, which we saw in the adiabatic case,
we call basically the beginning Hamiltonian.
Anyway, this operator B, which is the sum of the sigma x's, is
easy to construct.
But now what I want to do though,
is make a unitary operator which depends on that.
And we're going to do that by writing e to the minus i
beta, which is the parameter I've just introduced,
times the operator B.
So this operator, if you look at it, e to the minus i beta B,
since each term in B is a sigma x, what it's doing
is rotating the spins around the x direction by an angle, beta.
So now we have our two building block
unitary operators, each of which depends on one parameter.
So the algorithm consists of the following.
Start with the initial state, which I already described.
Make a choice for gamma.
Apply the unitary e to the minus i gamma C to that state.
Then make a choice for beta.
Apply either the minus i beta B to the state, and now measure
in the computational basis.
And you get out a string.
And now what's interesting is that you
can show that for certain problems,
you can find values of gamma and beta
such that the string that is produced
will satisfy a high fraction of the clauses.
I'm not going to show you now how you find the gamma
and beta to do that.
But trust me that that can be done for certain problems.
And in fact for one problem, called MAX-CUT, when we first
introduced this algorithm in 2014,
we were able to show that we could achieve
for a restricted version of MAX-CUT,
a certain approximation ratio which
was better than you would get if you just
picked a string at random.
Now you could say, OK, so what?
You did a little better than random guessing.
But what we managed to show was this worked in every case,
no matter how big the instance was, no matter how many bits
or qubits were involved.
With the right choice of gamma and beta,
we were guaranteed to get a good answer.
So in this case, we were able to show that the quantum
computer would perform at a certain level,
even on instances that we had not yet seen.
Of course, the factoring algorithm has that great virtue.
You know that if you had a functioning quantum
computer, no matter what integer you give it,
it will be able to find its factors.
And so here we were able to show that we
could get an approximation ratio that beat random guessing,
no matter what we gave it.
But we were not beating the best classical algorithm.
And then we looked at another problem called E3LIN2.
It doesn't really matter.
I could be much more specific.
But for now, just go with the story.
We looked at this problem, E3LIN2.
And we showed that with just this very shallow depth
circuit, we could achieve an approximation ratio, which
in 2014 actually beat the best classical algorithm
for this problem.
Now at that moment, we were in very good shape.
Because we had-- we I mean like me and my collaborators, Sam
Gutmann and Jeffrey Goldstone-- we
had a quantum algorithm which beat the best
classical algorithm for a certain task in all cases.
And word of this spread.
The way it spread was basically because Scott Aaronson
blogged about it and said there was this neat new quantum
algorithm, which then got the classical computer
scientists, the non-quantum people together.
And 10 of them ganged up on us and they
devised a classical algorithm which beat our quantum
algorithm for this task.
But what was interesting there is
we got a competition going between the classical
and the quantum.
And at this moment, in terms of provable worst-case performance
guarantees, the classical algorithm
is outperforming the QAOA, The QAOA
is the Quantum Approximate Optimization Algorithm.
Now we can go further with the QAOA
than I've already outlined.
Because the way I've outlined it,
it's a very simple algorithm with just two unitaries.
We apply the first one, then the next one, then we measure.
But actually you can go further.
You can apply the first one and then the second one.
Then you can apply the first one again
with a different parameter.
And then you can apply the beta dependent operator
with a different parameter.
Then if you keep going, by alternations of those two
operators, it turns out that you can only
improve the performance of the algorithm.
Now we have had trouble from a technical point of view showing
how much that improvement consists of.
It's been too hard for us to analyze it
beyond the very shallowest depth circuits that we did.
But I'm optimistic that when we run a near term quantum
computer, if we apply this algorithm which
should be fairly simple to do, because it's a shallow depth
gate model with simple-to-construct operators;
that we might discover that there are parameter
choices for which the solutions we get
are actually quite good, maybe even as
good as what we get from classical algorithms, maybe
even better.
So I think that applying the Quantum Approximate
Optimization Algorithm to near term quantum devices
is a definite avenue that this community should go down.
And I look forward to seeing the algorithm run on any platform
that is capable of running it.
