
In this video, we will learn how to implement and run
Grover's algorithm.
First, let's briefly recall what's
the problem solved by this algorithm,
and what are its benefits compared
to classical algorithms.
Grover's algorithm is designed to solve a search problem that
is completely unstructured.
Imagine that we have a list of two to the n numbers,
and we want to find the position of a given number that
appears once in this list.
If we know that the list is sorted,
we can use binary search, and find the position
of the desired number looking at just an element out of the two
to the n in the list.
But if we do not have any information whatsoever
on the list, then we may have to look at all of its elements
to find the position of the desired number.
In fact, given any deterministic classical algorithm
to solve this search problem, we can
construct a list on which the algorithm has
to look at all of the two to the n elements
before it finds the correct answer.
Even a randomized classical algorithm
would have to look at approximately two
to the n elements on average.
Using a quantum algorithm, we can do better than this.
Let's properly state your assumptions first.
We have a function, f, that maps any n digit binary
string into zero or one, with the property
that there exists a unique binary string for which
the function has value one.
This is the magic binary string that we want to find.
And let's call l the integer that corresponds to it.
So that f of l is equal to one.
We want to determine l while evaluating f as few times
as possible.
Since there is no property of f that can be exploited,
we know that we can do it in two to the n evaluations of f
classically, simply by applying f to all binary strings.
But can we do better?
Grover's algorithm can do this with only the square root
of two to the n evaluations of f, a quadratic improvement.
It is assumed that the function f
is encoded by a quantum circuit that acts on n plus one qubits.
The first n qubits are the input register.
The last qubit is the output register.
The circuit that implements f does not modify the input
register, and it performs the modulo 2 addition
between the output register and the result of f
applied to the input register.
Separating the input and the output registers
is standard in the quantum world because it allows reversibility
of the function.
We are given a three-set formula that
is the logical end of a series of clauses
and Boolean variables, where each clause is
the logical, or of three Boolean variables or their negation.
We want to find an assignment of the Boolean variables
that makes the formula evaluate to true, ensuring
that there is exactly one true literal per clause.
This is a variation of the well-know three-satisfiability
problem, and it is NP-hard.
In our implementation, when we use the instance of exactly one
three-satisfiability, specified by the formula
that you can see on the screen.
In this video, we will only work with the formula shown here.
To construct the function f, we need a quantum circuit
that acts on qubits encoding the Boolean variables,
and determines if this formula is satisfied.
Notice that the circuit that implements f should simply
be able to decide if the Boolean assignment corresponding
to the binary string it is given as input satisfies the formula.
Determining and returning the satisfying assignment
we be the goal of Grover's algorithm,
not of the function f.
The example formula has three Boolean variables,
x1, x2, and x3.
There are eight possible assignments.
And we can see in this table that only one
possible assignment evaluates to true.
You can verify this yourself.
As usual, one means true and zero means false.
Let's call uf the unitary matrix that implements f.
We can implement uf in several ways.
For simplicity, we have composed the problem
of computing uf by introducing three auxiliary qubits, one
for each clause.
For each clause, we construct a circuit
that sets the corresponding zero qubit to one
if and only if the clause has exactly one true term.
Finally, the output register of uf is set to one if and only
if all three auxiliary qubits are one.
For example, the circuit sets the bottom qubit,
y1 to one for the close x1, or x2, or not x3.
The x-gate flips the qubit corresponding to x3
because x3 appears negated in the clause.
Using three CNOT gates, we set y1 equal x1, x-or, x2, x-or, not
x3, implying that y1 is equal to one
if an odd number of literals is satisfied.
Since we want y1 equals to one if and only
if exactly one literal is satisfied,
we use a triply-controlled  not gate to finally implement
the desired formula.
The last x-gate simply resets the state of the qubit x3.
In a similar way, we can implement
the circuit that checks whether the second clause--
not x1, or not x2, or not x3-- is satisfied,
and one for the third clause-- not x1, or x2, or x3.
To implement this circuit there is a small obstacle,
the triply-controlled not gate is not
part of the basic gate set.
Such a gate can be implemented in several ways.
For simplicity, we choose to do it
using 3 doubly-controlled not gates and one auxiliary qubit,
as we show on the screen.
In the circuit, we can quickly verify
that q4 is set to one if and only if q0, q1, q2 are one.
The final doubly-con trolled not resets the state
of the auxiliary qubit q3.
Remember that if you plan to re-use the auxiliary qubits,
you should leave them in the same state as they begin.
With this blocks, we can construct
the full circuit that implements uf using four auxiliary qubits,
one for each of the three clauses,
and one for the triply-controlled not.
For each of the three clauses, we
set the corresponding auxiliary qubit to one
if the clause is satisfied.
Then we apply a logical end between these three
auxiliary qubits.
Finally, we run the same circuit in reverse
to reset the state of the auxiliary qubits.
We have seen how to implement the function
uf used in one of the building blocks of Grover's algorithm.
Remember that Grover's algorithms
has three steps, initialization, sign flip, and inversion
about the average.
Let's see how to implement these steps.
We will use the first three qubits lines
for the input, the fourth as output,
and the remaining qubits will be auxiliary qubits.
For the initialization, we apply Hadamard gates
on the input lines.
And on the output line, we apply an x-gate and then a Hadamard.
This will be important for the science lab.
At this point, the state of the input qubits
is in the uniform superposition.
All amplitudes are equal.
For the sign flip, we simply applied the circuit
that we constructed for uf.
Because we prepared the state of the output qubit
in the way we described, this has the effect
of flipping the sign of the amplitude corresponding
to the basis state for which uf outputs one.
The last step is the inversion about the average.
It is implemented by this simple circuit, which we can easily
verify applies the matrix shown at the bottom.
The matrix has the effect of mapping each amplitude
to twice the average coefficient minus the amplitude itself.
Because the average is smaller than most of the coefficients,
all amplitudes except the negative one gets reduced.
And the negative one gets amplified.
This is one iteration of Grover's algorithm.
The optimal number of iterations, k,
can be found using the formula shown
on the screen from which we derive that we
must perform two iterations.
This simply means that we should append to the overall circuit
another copy of the circuit that performs a sign flip,
and another copy of the circuit that
performs the inversion about the average.
And that's it.
We can now run this circuit on the simulator
and look at the results.
This circuit is unfortunately a bit too large
to run on a real device, so we will
have to rely on the simulator.
This is the histogram of the outcome probabilities
after 2,048 samples.
After two iterations and only two calls to the black box
function uf, we sample the correct string,
101 with probability of approximately 95%.
In comparison, any deterministic classical algorithm
would have needed eight calls in the worst case.
Notice that as we increase the number of iterations
of Grover's algorithm, the probability
of sampling the correct string actually goes down.
This is the histogram for three iterations,
and the probability dropped down to 32%.
The number of iterations must be chosen optimally.
