
In this section, we'll take a look at Grover's algorithm.
And as we've done previously with Deutsch-Jozsa and Shor's
algorithm, we'll do it in the context of the quantum circuit
model.
And by the end of the week, you'll
implement it for yourselves on a real cloud-based quantum
computer.
Grover's algorithm is often described
in the context of searching an unstructured database.
Here though, let's generalize the search problem
to the related problem of function inversion.
Consider a function, f of x, which
can take on the value 0 or 1, depending on the argument x.
For example, for x equals 10, the function f of 10 equals 1,
and it's 0 for all other x values.
Now, the function inversion problem is the following.
Given f of x equals 1, can we find
the value of x or a value of x if there
is more than one solution.
Classically, one has little choice
but to try different x-values and test the function.
So for n total x-values of which M satisfy f of x equals 1,
it will take on the order of N divided by M tries
to succeed with high probability.
However, on a quantum computer, the same task
succeeds with high probability in only square root of N
over M tries, a quadratic improvement
over classical computing.
And while a quadratic improvement may not
seem like a lot, it does become practically significant
for problems with large N.
To implement Grover's algorithm, we
need an operational block that can
recognize if a test value of x satisfies our function or not.
This operation is called an oracle.
And it's a key part of each trial, which
we'll call a Grover iteration.
Now, it may seem challenging or even
cheating to define an oracle that represents, for example,
our database.
After all, in loading such a database into our quantum
computer, haven't we already searched it?
Now, that's certainly true, but this isn't how an oracle works.
Again, it's worthwhile to think in terms
of a mathematical function.
The oracle doesn't need to know in advance every answer
to every function call, nor does it
need to have a ledger of all the input and output values.
Rather, it just needs to be able to calculate the function
and recognize when a particular condition is satisfied.
And conceptually, we can program different functions
into our oracle while keeping the underlying
machinery in place.
We won't discuss in detail how this is done,
as it's obviously problem-dependent.
But we just note that this type of oracle
can be designed using reversible logic approaches.
The idea behind Grover's algorithm is the following.
We start with an index register of values x running from 0
to n minus 1.
The oracle takes a test value x, calculates the function
f of x, and performs modulo-2 addition
of f of x with a helper qubit, which
we'll call the oracle qubit.
The oracle qubit is prepared in a superposition state
0 minus 1, and it plays a similar role
as the helper qubit did in the Deutsch-Jozsa algorithm studied
in course 1.
If f of x equals 0, then the modulo-2 addition
leaves the superposition state unchanged.
However, if f of x equals 1, then there
is a sign change on the oracle qubit.
0 minus 1 becomes 1 minus 0.
And by pulling out this minus sign,
we get back to the original superposition state, 0 minus 1
but with a minus sign in front.
And as we saw with the Deutsch-Jozsa algorithm,
this minus sign can be written as minus 1 to the f of x power.
And so the minus 1 is realized when f of x equals 1, that is,
when a particular value of x is a solution to the search
problem.
This is how the oracle marks a quantum
state when it recognizes a satisfied condition.
To implement Grover's algorithm, we
start with the initialization stage of the quantum circuit
model.
Since there are n possible values of x,
we'll choose q qubits for register 1.
And register 2 will hold a single qubit,
which is the oracle qubit.
Register 1 qubits are prepared in state 0 and the oracle qubit
in state 1.
And as before, we'll associate register one with yellow
and register 2 with green to help keep track
as the algorithm unfolds.
In the compute stage, the first step
is to create a large equal superposition
state of register 1 qubits using q Hadamard gates.
This state has n equals 2 the qth power components.
And as we did before, we'll replace the 2 to the qth power
binary combinations of q qubits with their decimal equivalence
x equals 0 to n minus 1.
The oracle qubit is placed into the superposition state
0 minus 1 using a single Hadamard gate.
The next step is to implement a Grover iteration, which we'll
call G, and we'll do this on the order of square root of n times
to obtain a solution with order unit probability.
Each G contains the oracle operator O,
which with the help of the oracle qubit,
will leave a minus 1 on the register 1 states
for values x which satisfy f of x equals 1.
And as we'll see in a moment, the oracle operation
has a geometric interpretation.
It's a reflection operation.
We'll come back to that in a moment.
Now, the remainder of the Grover iteration
is a conditional phase shift nestled between Hadamard gates.
The conditional phase shift leaves state 0 alone
and, otherwise, places a minus 1 phase shift
in front of all other states x.
This can be written in terms of an equal superposition state,
just like the one we started with.
And we'll call this state CI.
I encourage you to work this out for yourselves.
And again, as we'll see in a moment,
this set of three operations can also
be viewed as a reflection, this time, across the vector psi.
Together with the oracle, these two reflections
in the Grover iteration serve to rotate the quantum state
by an angle theta.
We'll look at the geometric picture in a moment.
But for now, let's continue with the circuit model.
To see how the Grover iteration acts on register 1,
let's rewrite the sum over x as two terms.
One term will be the sum over all x-values that
are not solutions, that is, give f of x equals 0.
And the second term will be the remaining
x-values that are a solution and give f of x equal 1.
This, in turn, can be written in terms of normalized states,
alpha and beta.
We then run the Grover iteration on the order
of square root of n times.
Let's assume there are k iterations, with each iteration
imparting a phase shift theta.
The net result is cosine of 2k plus 1 over 2
in front of state alpha, which are not solutions,
and sine 2k plus 1 over 2 in front of state beta, which
are the solutions.
And the oracle qubit remains unchanged throughout.
Starting from a small angle theta, much less than pi
over 2, we see that as k increases,
the cosine term goes to 0 suppressing
the amplitude of the wrong answers
and the sine term towards 1, enhancing the amplitude
of the correct answers.
Then a measurement is made, and one
of the x-value solutions in the state beta
is measured with high probability.
Let's now look at the geometric interpretation
to see how repeated Grover iterations lead
to the correct solution.
The state CI is in the register 1
equals superposition state with end components.
And we write it in terms of the states alpha and beta, where
alpha are all the x-values that are not solutions,
and beta represent the single x-value or multiple end values
that are solutions yielding f of x equals 1.
The state's alpha and beta are orthogonal,
and we can represent them as orthogonal vectors.
Since the state CI is normalized to 1,
we can also write state CI in terms
of the cosine and sine theta over 2.
And the state CI makes an angle theta over 2
with the alpha axis.
, Now since we start with all x-values equally likely,
and we assume there's only one or a few solutions,
the vector CI is close to the alpha axis.
The oracle acts first, and it places a minus sign
in front of the state beta, which
represents the valid solutions.
This is a reflection over the alpha axis.
Next, the remainder of the Grover iteration,
the conditional phase shifts nestled between Hadamard gates,
is a reflection over the state CI.
The result from a single Grover iteration
is then to move the state CI and angle
theta towards the beta axis.
Essentially, the amplitudes of the solutions
are being enhanced, while the amplitudes of the remaining
states are being suppressed.
The Grover iteration is then repeated k times,
where k is on the order of square root of N.
The iterative reflections continue
to push the vector toward the beta axis,
increasing the likelihood that when a measurement is made,
the state will be projected into a value of x
that satisfies f of x equal 1.
Lastly, we can show that the number of iterations R
is of the order square root of n.
The state CI is an angle gamma away from the beta axis,
where gamma equals arccosine square root of M over N.
and we know that each iteration pushes us an angle
theta toward the beta axis.
So the number of repetitions we need
is the closest integer to the ratio of gamma over theta.
We want to rotate the state CI at least pass pi over 4
from the alpha axis so that the probability of measuring
a beta solution is greater than a 1/2,
In fact, we can place an upper bound on the number R,
and it's pi/4 times the square root of M divided by N. This
shows that Grover's algorithm will
find a solution with high probability
for only order square root of n iterations,
whereas, it'll take a classical computer on the order of n
queries.
