
Some students ask me about D-wave after the class,
so I think I should say something about D-wave.
It certainly is an interesting story,
so maybe I'll put a timeline.
In 1999, D-wave was founded.
And presumably they didn't come out of nowhere.
The founders must have been doing some work before in 1999.
In 2000, Fahri, Goldstone, Gutmann, and Sipser
write a paper what propose adiabatic quantum computation.
And a couple of years later, Aharanov--

unfortunately, I did not look up the exact date before this.
A couple of years later, Aharanov et. al.
Show it's universal.
And in 2007, D-wave announces first a 16-bit prototype
adiabatic quantum computer.
And there is a lot of skepticism about this.
So Scott Aaronson goes on a tirade in his blog
and launches a crusade against them, maybe,
saying they couldn't possibly--
saying the things are saying couldn't possibly be true.
And that's-- well, there's a couple of questions here.
When they were founded, adiabatic quantum computation
didn't exist.
So presumably they were founded to some other kind
of quantum computation.
And at some point, you decide adiabatic quantum computation
was way to go.
And also sometime between 2007 and today,
I couldn't figure out when, D-wave now
says they do quantum annealing.
So what's the difference?
Well, adiabatic quantum computation,
you're in the ground state and you
would like to operate at a temperature low enough
to stay in ground state.
So what is this temperature?
We call quantum adiabatic computing ground state.
Let's have a first excited state.
And this is what's known as an avoided crossing, where really
this line and this line have roughly
the same structure of the quantum state,
as do this line and this line.
And you get a super position of these two structures
right here.
And the more these two structures differ,
the smaller the energy gap is between them.
So that's really an oversimplification
and waving my hands, but it is something like that.
Yeah?
Can you evolve your Hamiltonian quite quickly most of the time,
and then just slow down that evolution,
when you're going past--
You can, you know where the gaps are,
or rather, if you know where these things are,
you can evolve it quickly most of the time.
And in fact in Grover's algorithm,
you can get a square root speed up by adiabatic computing,
or a square root speed up over the classical search
by adiabatic computing.
But the way to do that, is in Grover's algorithm,
there is one spot where you have an avoided crossing,
which is I think 1 over square root of n.
Anyway, to get the speed up, you have
to go quickly most of the time, then slow down right
before the avoided crossing.
And then speed up right after it.

So yeah.
Of course, if you don't know where these points where they
come close are, it's going to be hard to speed up and slow down
your evolution to account for them.
Anyway, the temperature means that one of your qubits
might get excited, but if you excite this state, it's not
going to go to this state, because the state
and this state are structurally quite
different with excited qubit in this state,
and I go up to this state.
So the temperature is bigger than the smallest gap.
OK.
So gaps account for energy, and energy converts to temperature
by thermodynamics.
So right temperature is probably going to be bigger
than the smallest gap.
But it is still small.
Anyway, D-wave does not operate at a temperature small enough
to avoid thermal excitations.
And that's not because they don't operate at a small temp--
they operated in extremely low temperature.
It's just that the structure of their ships
allows for thermal excitations, even at that temperature.

So people were arguing with them about whether they could really
call this quantum adiabatic computation.
So they decided to call it quantum annealing instead.
So what does that mean?
Well, if it was quantum adiabatic computation,
there would be a proof that the quantum computer was universal,
which means that theoretically it
could solve any problem that any quantum computer can.
Although there is the problem of blowing up
the size by a polynomial factor converting from the gate model
to the adiabatic computation model and back.
So if it really was a quantum adiabatic computer,
they would have a good reason to claim that it could do things
that classical computers can't.
Well, they have a quantum annealing computer.
it is certainly using quantum processes
and operating in the quantum [INAUDIBLE],,
but is it more powerful?

And I want to say no theoretical results.

So there are chips that you can program the Hamiltonian,
and you can program a Hamiltonian to slowly change
from one Hamiltonian to another Hamiltonian.
And you can put the starting Hamiltonian
into the ground state.
And you're operating at a temperature too large
to not have thermal excitations.
So presumably you could take this process
and construct some mathematical model of it.
Although you might have to worry about what
the right temperature for this mathematical model is.
And then you can ask, does this mathematical model
let you do anything that you can't
do on classical computers?

And I don't know.
Nobody knows.

And the other problem is that they have experiments
that they claim show that the computer does things better
than classical computers, but is it
really an exponential speed up?
Or is it just that their computer has electrical--
it has a Hamiltonian trying to find its ground state,
and it does this reasonably fast.
And maybe there's a constant factor better
than classical computers that is letting it find the ground
state better than classical computers can,
because physics processes can be really fast.
So we don't really know whether D-wave is more powerful.
