
The third thing we need to do with our ions
is to measure or read out their quantum states.
As explained earlier, this is done
by counting photons that are emitted from the ions
when they are illuminated by a readout laser.
This readout needs to be done fast,
and the speed is determined by the number of photons
you can collect from the ion, and how quickly and efficiently
the photon detector can give you a click when
the photon hits it.
Ions emit light isotropically, or in all directions,
so it's not very easy to collect it all.
For few-ion systems, light collection
is typically done with a very large lens,
which, due to its size, is located outside the vacuum
chamber.
This can collect a few percent of the total emitted light
and send it to a detector, such as a photomultiplier tube that
converts individual arriving photons
into short electrical pulses that we
can count with electronics.
This works well because you only have
to collect from a very small region in space
where the few ions reside.
For large arrays of ions, this technique
is highly inefficient.
Instead, we are now working to eliminate the large collection
lens and integrate the photon detectors into the ion trap
chips with a detector right below each ion.
Since the detector is located only a few tens of micrometers
away from the ion, they can be made very small
and still collect the same amount of light
as a big lens placed far away.
At the same time, these detectors
can be arrayed around the ion trap chip in very large numbers
to match the size and pitch of the ion qubit array.
This can, in principle, be a very efficient and scalable way
to collect and detect light in a trapped ion quantum processor.
The detectors that we are using for this purpose
are known as Avalanche Photodiodes, or APDs.
They are routinely fabricated by academic research groups
and by industry using the same facilities and techniques that
are utilized for microchip technology.
And there is therefore a clear path to incorporating them
in our ion traps.
Indeed, at Lincoln Laboratory and MIT,
we've already demonstrated that we
can detect photons emitted from trapped ions
using these integrated APDs.
The fourth thing we need to do with our ions
is move them around.
We call this shuttling, and it provides
a capability that is quite unique to the ion qubit
modality.
You have to find some way to move and distribute
quantum information around your quantum computer in order
to create the large entangled states required
for practical quantum algorithms.
Ions can be shuttled by changing the voltages applied
to the trap electrodes.
The voltages are typically generated
with electronics located outside the vacuum system,
and brought to the electronics via long wires
that are connected to the chip around the edges.
This is done routinely, and is fairly
straightforward for few-ion systems,
because there aren't that many electrodes
and corresponding voltage sources required
for such a small scale.
However, for large arrays of ions,
we will require lots of electrodes,
and therefore lots of voltages and wires.
Think about 10 per ion.
Once again, we lean on integration
to solve this scalability problem.
At Lincoln Laboratory, we've begun
to develop tunable voltage sources that
are integrated into ion traps, with an individual voltage
source below each electrode and connected
through on-chip wiring.
We can use commercial CMOS foundry facilities
to fabricate these integrated electronic devices because they
are built from the same transistor technology that
is used in classical computer chips.
These individual voltage sources, called Digital
to Analog Converters, or DACs, can all
be programmed and varied at high speed
with digital signals that come down just a few wires
connected to the trap chip, similar to
the USB communication protocol.
I'd also like to point out that, as we go forward,
there are other electronic devices that we can think
about integrating, things like circuits that
detect the electrical pulses from our photon counters,
or even classical computing processors that
can store and manipulate classical information.
As you might expect, we ultimately
need to integrate these different control
and measurement technologies together into one chip.
This means that we need to use a fabrication process that
is compatible with it all.
This is not a trivial concern, since the performance
of the required devices is very sensitive to the fabrication
techniques and to the particular materials used.
We keep this important constraint in mind
as we develop our scalable technology,
and make sure we are keeping everything compatible.
In particular, all of the technologies I've discussed
are completely compatible with advanced CMOS fabrication
techniques and materials.
This means that we are truly poised
to take advantage of all of the incredible scalable
technology that has been developed
for classical computers, propelled by billions
of dollars of investment over decades for our quantum
computer.
This animation is our vision of what a scalable trapped ion
quantum computer will look like.
Ions are trapped above the plane of a surface electrode ion trap
chip.
They're individually addressed and controlled
with laser light delivered by integrated photonics,
and light emitted by the ions is detected
with integrated single-photon APDs below the trap electrodes.
The ions are shuttled around by varying the voltages
on these trap electrodes using integrated electronic circuits.
The movie shows a particular quantum computing algorithm,
and you may think to yourself, this
doesn't look like a computer.
To that I would say that we are trying
to build something that computes in a fundamentally
different and transformative way.
And with this in mind, I would argue
that we shouldn't expect it to look
like anything we've ever seen.
