
Let's now take a deeper dive into the fabrication
of the superconducting TSV interposer wafer.
First, we fabricate the TSVs, fill them
with superconducting material, and pattern the metal
on the wafer surface.
Next, we mount the interposer wafer to a temporary carrier
wafer, flip over the TSV wafer, and remove the excess wafer
thickness down to the TSVs.
Afterwards, we add metal to this revealed surface.
And fabricate control circuitry or qubits onto that surface.
This revealed side is the surface that ultimately will
be near the qubit layer qubits.
After all the processing is complete, we dice the wafer
and release the individual chips from the temporary carrier
wafer.
At the end, the chips are available for bump bonding
into the three stack.
After the wafers are fabricated, but before we dice and release
them, we do extensive room temperature
and cold temperature testing to confirm that the TSVs are
superconducting.
Here, we see a 200 millimeter TSV wafer,
which has 52 identical die.
On each die, we have a number of TSV test structures
in addition to the active circuits that we're
using for our qubit stacks.
We use our process control monitor
chips to assess the individual metal properties,
as well as four-point probe structures to look
at both single TSVs and chains of TSVs.
As one example, we have links of 400 TSVs in series
that we can probe to assess the resistance.
When we look at the room temperature resistance
of these 400 TSV chains, we see that on average we have
37 ohms of resistance per link.
Of even more interest to us at room
temperature is that we see the standard deviation is only
two ohms, which tells us that there
is a high degree of uniformity across the wafer.
Afterwards, we took a subset of these devices
and cooled them down in our dilution fridge
to assess the superconducting transition temperature.
We saw that the devices go superconducting
around 1.6 Kelvin, and that the midpoint is 3.1 Kelvin.
This is well above our millikelvin operational
temperature.
In advance of having the full three
stack available for testing, in 2016 and 2017,
we also conducted a number of experiments
looking at components of the eventual three stack.
Since qubits are so sensitive to materials and processes,
the first experiment we did was to take
a regular single-chip qubit and design a flip chip
version of it where all the inductors and capacitors had
the same values, but the qubit chip was flipped and bonded
to another chip.
We wanted to make sure that the extra processing
and the presence of another chip bonded to the qubit chip
didn't affect the coherence time.
Here's what the circuit looked like for our single-chip qubit.
The chip has six superconducting flux qubits, each of which
is coupled to a bias line and a readout resonator.
For the flip chip version, we took all the control
and readout circuitry and moved it to another chip.
The only things left on the qubit chip
were the qubits themselves.
Then we bonded the two chips together.
The figure on the right shows an infrared image
looking through both chips and showing
that structures on one chip are well aligned
to those on the other chip.
We found that the relaxation and coherence
times of the single chip and flipped chip qubits
were virtually identical.
This is interesting for a couple of reasons.
First, it shows that 3D integration
doesn't significantly degrade qubit performance, which
is important.
Second, we've demonstrated that we can move all the control
and readout circuitry to another chip, which
is one of the things we're planning to do for the full 3D
integration scheme.
Of course, in this experiment, we
stuck with the same general design
because we wanted to isolate the effect of 3D integration.
In future work, we're planning on shrinking
the resonator and other components
so they can fit under or between qubits in a 2D array.
We're excited to be continuing to develop
further and further demonstrations using this three
stack scalable architecture.
Within both digital quantum computers and simulators,
as well as analog quantum systems,
there's a strong need for high connectivity between qubits
as well as for significant control
and read out complexity.
Although there are differences between digital and analog
quantum algorithms, both systems have
similar 3D scalability needs that
are requiring significant engineering developments.
We are planning to use this three stack
hardware to scale to test beds with 100 qubits or more.
We'll then use what we learn from these systems
as stepping stones to future larger scale demonstrations
of quantum computers.
