
Superconducting circuits are a quantum computing modality
where quantum information is stored in superpositions
of charge and current.
In a superconducting metal, as you cool it down
below some transition temperature,
the electrons pair up into what's known as Cooper pairs
after one of the inventors of the most
successful theory of superconductivity,
the BCS theory.
The B is for Bardeen and the S is for Schrieffer.
Superconductors have many applications.
And there's a large market for them
far beyond for quantum computing.
Superconductors have zero resistance at DC frequencies.
So they're really useful for applications
where you have large currents, for example, to create
large magnetic fields.
So if you get an MRI, the large magnetic fields
are probably generated by currents going around
in superconductors.
If you tried to make those fields out of regular wire,
you'd have so much heating that it wouldn't work.
Superconductors are also sometimes used
for maglev trains and for low power
classical digital circuits.
One of the most simple types of superconducting circuit
is just a linear harmonic oscillator made up
of some inductor, L, and a capacitor,
C. In an LC oscillator, if you put in energy
at the right frequency, it will cycle
between charging up the capacitor
and putting current through the inductor.
How fast this happens depends on the values of the capacitor
and the inductor.
But for the circuits we're talking about,
it happens a few billion times a second
or at gigahertz frequencies.
This is also the same frequency that a lot of consumer
electronics work at, like your Wi-Fi network at home
or your cell phone, which means that we
get to use a lot of equipment that's been developed
over the years to meet growing consumer and commercial needs.
A linear harmonic oscillator has equally spaced energy levels.
And the energy spectra is quantized,
meaning you can only have a discrete number of excitations.
You can observe this quantization
provided your circuit is cold enough
that the energy associated with the temperature
is much less than the energy level spacing
and provided your materials are good enough
that you don't lose much energy every oscillation period.
This is one of the reasons we need to use superconductors.
If the metal were normal, we'd lose too much energy
per oscillation period.
However, there's a problem with using
a simple linear oscillator as a qubit.
If you have a qubit, you want to be
able to move it around the Bloch Sphere
into superpositions of 0 and 1.
But in a linear oscillator, all the energy levels
are equally spaced.
This means that if you're in the 1 state
and you try to put in energy to make the qubit go to the 0
state, you can end up in the 2 state or some higher state
instead.
And so we can't think of our system as a qubit
anymore, because a qubit should only have two energy levels.
The way to make a linear oscillator into something
that can be used as a qubit is to introduce
a non-linear element.
That will make it so the energy splitting between the 0
and the 1 state is different than the energy levels
between the other states.
The most common way of doing this
is to use a Josephson junction, or JJ.
JJs were predicted by Brian Josephson in 1962.
A JJ is just a very thin insulating barrier
between two superconductors.
If the barrier is thin enough, the superconducting electrons
can tunnel through the barrier without losing any energy.
The most important thing about a Josephson junction
for our purposes is that the inductance
depends on the current going through the junction.
This is different from a loop of wire
where the inductance is just a fixed value.
And the nonlinear dependence of the inductance
changes the energy spectra, so the levels
are no longer equally spaced.
This means we can uniquely address
one energy level, which we're going to make into our qubit.
One of the DiVincenzo Criteria is
that we have to be able to initialize our system.
If we want to be able to put our system in the ground state
and have it stay there, it's important
that thermal excitations don't excite the qubit out
of the ground state.
That means we need to be cold.
Exactly how cold this is depends on what the energy levels are.
A typical superconducting qubit frequency of 5 gigahertz
corresponds to about 250 milliKelvin.
So we need to be much colder than that,
around 10 milliKelvin or so.
You can get to these temperatures
using dilution fridges.
This is a three-case stage, 3 Kelvin, so 3 degrees
above absolute zero.
We get to that temperature by using a pulse tube
cooler, which you might be able to hear in the background.
And then to get colder, we use a dilution refrigerator,
which actually uses a mixture of helium-3 and helium-4.
Helium-3 is just a lighter isotope of helium-4.
And the basic concept behind a dilution refrigerator
is that it's similar to the way you cool a cup of coffee.
You blow across the top of it.
And what you're really doing is removing the vapor.
And what has to happen is more coffee has
to come out of the liquid and into the vapor,
and that takes energy, and that's how your coffee cools.
So we can use the same trick with helium-3 and helium-4.
Dilution fridges used to be very specialized, hard to use,
and required liquid helium.
Now, in part driven by the interest in quantum computing,
companies are making automated systems that are much easier
to operate and to maintain.
They also don't require a continuous source
of liquid helium to run, only electricity.
