
In the last section, we focused on two
of the DiVincenzo criteria, qubit coherence, and quantum
gates.
We developed an intuitive figure of merit, the average number
of gate operations, that can be performed
before an error occurs.
Such metrics are important, because they
allow us to compare different qubit modalities,
even when those modalities have remarkably different
properties.
However, the definition we introduced only
accounted for errors due to qubit decoherence.
That's fine for qubits that are dominated by decoherence,
but some qubit modalities are limited
by other sources of errors.
For example, control errors, imperfections in the pulses
that are used to drive a gate operation.
For these qubits, even if their coherence times
were practically infinite, their gates
would still be subject to control errors.
So what we need is a more rigorous way
to characterize the robustness of a gate operation, one
that's sensitive to a broad set of error sources.
And that leads us to the subject of this section, a more general
concept, called gate fidelity.
Gate fidelity is a rigorous means
to define how well a gate operation works.
Essentially, it's a measure of how closely our actual gate
operation matches, on average, a theoretically ideal version
of that operation.
For example, if we apply an X gate
to a qubit prepared in state 0, how much do we get to state 1?
Now intuitively, errors could occur along
any direction of the Bloch Sphere
and so we need to check for errors along all directions,
after the operation is complete.
Until this point in the course, we've
only measured the qubit along the Z direction.
But in principle, we can choose to measure the qubit
along any axis that passes through the center of the Bloch
Sphere, including the x-axis or the y-axis.
In addition, gate errors may be manifest differently,
depending on the starting point of the qubit,
so we need to check how the gate performs
against different initial states,
and not just the north pole, for example.
Now at this point, you may be asking yourself,
how is this even feasible?
The qubit state can be anywhere on the surface of the Bloch
Sphere, and that represents an infinite number
of possible initial and final states.
How can we possibly check them all?
Well in fact, we don't have to.
And that's because we can define a basis set that spans
the entire qubit state space.
To draw an analogy, think of global positioning.
Our position anywhere on the globe
can be represented by projecting it onto a convenient basis,
in this case, a coordinate system that spans the globe.
We often use latitude and longitude,
but we could equally well use Cartesian coordinates, x, y,
and z.
Similarly, we can define a basis that
spans the entire qubit state space,
and then use it to specify any qubit state at the input.
We can also use it to characterize any state
at the output, by projecting back onto this basis.
This works, because quantum mechanics
is described by linear algebra.
It's enough to understand projections
to and from the basis set to know what will happen globally.
And in fact, as we'll see later in the course,
such projective measurement plays a crucial role
in the digitization of errors, and our ability
to correct them.
Although the coefficients of a superposition state
will dictate the probability of obtaining a 0 or 1
when measurement is done, for any given measurement,
we will get a 0 or a 1.
In this way, quantum states and their errors,
which appear to be analog, can in fact
be digitized through projective measurement.
Now we saw previously that n qubits can represent 2
to the n states.
Here, the basis can be represented
in a matrix form, and the number of matrix elements
that spans the state space is the square
of the number of states.
So 2 to the n, quantity squared.
For a single qubit, n equals 1, and we need four elements.
For two qubits n equals 2, and the number quickly
increases to 16.
So determining the gate fidelity is essentially
a standard black box type problem.
We have a gate operation, and theoretically, we
know how it should perform.
However, due to errors, its actual operation
isn't precisely known. That's the black box.
And so we need to characterize, on average, how well our gate
operation actually performs.
To do this, we probe the gate operation using the input basis
states, perform the actual gate operation,
and then, for each input, project the resulting output
state onto the entire basis set.
We then compare our results to what
we would expect from a theoretically ideal operation
to determine the gate fidelity.
The approach just described is called process tomography,
and it represents a complete description of the errors
during a gate operation.
It also requires a large number of steps to implement,
as the product of input and output elements
is 2 the 4 n-th power.
Now although there are 2 to the 2 n-th constraints,
due to the properties of these matrices,
this only reduces the total number
of measurements by a small amount, thus, implementing
process tomography scales very poorly
with the number of qubits, and becomes
impractical as n gets large.
This is an issue, because although our gates only
act on one or two qubits, the errors
may cause leakage to other nearby qubits,
qubit 3, qubit 4, qubit 5, et cetera.
And so to account for this, the basis we choose
must encompass all n qubits.
In addition, process tomography is sensitive to all errors,
including initialization errors, when
preparing the input state, and measurement
errors at the output, which although certainly real errors,
are unrelated to the quality of the gate operation itself.
As a result, an alternative approach,
called randomized benchmarking, has also been developed.
Randomized benchmarking essentially
interleaves the gate operation being
characterized with a random assortment of other gate
operations.
Although half of the gates are chosen at random,
we know what they are, and so we can predict the expected output
state, assuming all of the gates were ideal.
This is then compared to the same experiment,
but with only the random assortment of gates,
to see how much the error rate has changed when
adding the interleaved gate.
This change in error rate is then
attributed to the interleave gate itself.
This approach is then repeated for increasing numbers
of pulses, in order to obtain a refined estimate
for the average error per gate, and thereby, the gate fidelity.
Randomized benchmarking is much more efficient
than process tomography, and it's also
insensitive to initialize and measurement errors.
However, it only provides a net error rate,
without revealing specific error channels.
However it's measured, a gate fidelity of 100%
means that our actual operation perfectly
matches the ideal operation.
For example, no matter where our qubit starts on the Bloch
Sphere, our actual x-gate would perfectly
rotate the input state to the correct output state.
Now, as you might expect, it's generally not
possible to achieve a perfect gate fidelity.
There will always be some level of error,
whether due to qubit decoherence during the operation,
imperfections in the control pulse itself, et cetera.
The goal, then, is to see how many
nines, two nines, 99%, three nines, 99.9%, that one
can achieve.
The higher the fidelity, the closer
it comes to an ideal gate.
And as we'll see later in the course, achieving high fidelity
is critical, because it translates directly
to two important aspects of quantum error correction.
First, the fidelity must at least reach a minimum value,
called the threshold, in order for the error correction
to give us a net improvement in the error rate.
And second, once above this threshold,
the higher the fidelity, the less the resource overhead
required to implement the error correction.
