
There are numerous examples of quantum mechanical two-level
systems in nature that potentially
could serve as qubits.
For example, the electronic states
of an ion or the electron spin of a phosphorus atom
implanted in silicon or a nuclear spin of a defect
in diamond.
We can even manufacture electrical circuits that
behave as quantum mechanical two-level systems,
or artificial atoms.
But what makes a good qubit?
And how do we assess these qubit modalities
and compare them to one another?
And how can we determine if a particular modality
is well-suited for quantum computing?
We can begin to answer these questions
by first drawing on our intuition
from classical computing.
Basically, same question.
What makes a good classical logic element?
And why did we end up with transistors?
Well, if we want to build a computer at scale large enough
to perform interesting problems, we
should start with a technology that scales well, one
where we know how to define and characterize the logic elements
and where we can manufacture them in large numbers.
These devices must also accurately
represent and process classical information.
We need to be able to set their states to provide
an input to the computer, and we need
to be able to measure the result to get an answer.
Finally, these devices must be robust against failure
in order to complete the computation
and reliably obtain the answer.
Clearly, transistors satisfy all these requirements very well,
and so it's no wonder that computers today
are built from transistors and not,
say, vacuum tubes or mechanical switches.
So with this in mind, what makes a good qubit?
Around the year 2000, Dr. David DiVincenzo, then
a researcher at IBM, articulated five necessary conditions
that any qubit technology must at least possess
if it is to be a suitable physical implementation
for large scale quantum computation.
First, it should be a scalable physical system
with well-defined and characterized qubits.
Second, we must be able to set the input state
and, third, measure the resulting output state.
Fourth, we must be able to perform a universal set of gate
operations.
For example, the single and two-qubit
gates that we discussed last week that are
needed to run an algorithm.
And fifth, the qubits must robustly
represent quantum information.
In many ways, these requirements are
similar to those for classical computers,
and it's only in how the requirements are met that we
can identify differences.
For example, performing a universal set
of one-qubit and two-qubit gates rather than
universal Boolean logic.
Or to robustly represent quantum information,
qubits must have long coherence times,
a concept that loosely translates to the mean time
to failure for a transistor.
In addition to these five requirements
for the qubit technology, David DiVincenzo
also added two conditions related
to the communication of quantum information between qubits.
So continuing from number five, number six
is that the technology must support the interconversion
of quantum information between a stationary qubit and a flying
qubit.
And seven, there must be a way to transfer flying qubits
faithfully between two locations.
Basically, these two requirements
describe a quantum version of an interconnect--
that is, the means to take the quantum information
encoded in one qubit, convert it
to an object that can move, like a photon,
provide the means to guide a photon without loss
to another qubit at a distant location,
and then hand back that quantum information.
Again, analogous to requirements for routing
signals within a classical computer,
but following the rules of quantum mechanics.
These criteria, today referred to as the DiVincenzo Criteria,
articulate the basic requirements
that any qubit technology must possess
if it's to be a viable physical implementation for quantum
computation.
