
So far people have been working with small arrays of qubits,
up to around a few tens of qubits.
At some point, however, we run into a very basic problem
of where to put everything.
We want a large number of qubits that are coupled together.
But if we look back at our picture,
we can see that the actual qubit is only a small portion of what
needs to go on our chips.
We have bias lines, control lines, read out resonators,
for example.
And those can all be bigger than the qubit.
Now, you can imagine making some of these smaller.
But eventually, if you have a large array of qubits,
it's going to be hard to even get wiring
to the qubits in the center if you're
working in two dimensions.
And this is why most of the demonstrations to date
have been limited to geometries where
you can access the qubits laterally
on the surface of a chip.
This problem is not unique to superconducting qubits.
In fact, many applications have this same issue.
Consider, for example, a large scale imager
with lots of pixels.
You need to be able to get your signals out of the pixels.
But you also want to be able to put a lot of pixels
on a chip to fill a 2D array.
One way industry has solved this issue
is to move to 3D integration, where
signals are brought in vertically
instead of laterally.
We think it's necessary to move to 3D integration
to make large scale superconducting qubit circuits.
But we need to be careful when doing so,
because our qubits are affected by things
that aren't an issue with classical electronics, which
is what 3D integration was developed for.
For example, one way to efficiently route wires in 3D
is to build up a multi-layer stack of metal,
with dielectric in between so wiring on different layers
can cross each other.
But we know that having lossy dielectric materials
near a qubit can cause it to lose its quantum state.
So we've developed a new idea for how
to get the benefits of 3D integration,
the efficient wiring and ability to bring in signals vertically
without affecting the qubit.
Here's our proposed scheme, which
has three separate silicon chips that are held together
with indium bump bonds.
Within the three stack, each of the layers
is fabricated separately.
We've seen that there are process incompatibilities
between the processes in separate layers of this three
stack.
For example, we must stay at a relatively low temperature
once we've deposited shadow evaporated Josephson Junctions
on the qubit layer, the interposer layer.
However, we need to have processes
at higher temperature for the read outs
and interconnect wafer.
By separately fabricating each layer,
and combining them at the end of the process,
we have the flexibility to combine our best processes,
and optimize the capabilities of the full stack.
The top layer of the three stack contains our qubits.
Here we show two examples, capacitively shunted flux
qubits, that we use for quantum annealing applications,
and transmons, another type of qubit
that we use for gate based quantum computing.
As of 2018, state of art single qubit coherence times
for each of these styles are on the order
of 50 to 100 microseconds.
At Lincoln Lab we are simultaneously
working to further increase qubit coherence,
and to retain that coherence as we
move into the third dimension with increasing
interconnect complexity.
The second tier in the three stack
is the interposer wafer, where Through Silicon Vias, or TSVs,
that are lined with superconducting metal,
route signals between the two sides of the wafer.
The interposer provides three key benefits.
First, it provides an isolated mode
volume for each of the high coherence
qubits in order to retain coherence
times comparable to those in a planar device geometry.
Second, the interposer provides a nearby surface
for inductive or capacitive coupling
across the vacuum gap between the qubit plane
and the interposer plane.
This interposer surface can be used for control
and read out circuitry, or for coupling qubits
that bridge two devices on the qubit plane.
The third benefit of the interposer
is that it connects the qubits with the read outs
and interconnect multi-layer wafer on the bottom layer
of the three stack, while still having the qubits keep
a healthy distance from the lossy dielectrics
on that multi-layer interconnect module.
Moving down to the multi-layer read out and interconnect
layer, here we are leveraging previous work
we've done at Lincoln Lab on niobium devices.
We previously fabricated tri-layer Josephson
Junctions for superconducting qubits,
which turned out to have lower coherence than the aluminum
shadow evaporated Josephson Junctions that we use today.
We also currently fabricate fully planarized
multi-layer niobium devices with integrated tri-layer
Josephson Junctions for both Single Flux Quantum, or SFQ circuits,
as well as near quantum limited traveling
wave parametric amplifiers, or TWPAs.
For the three stack configuration
we envision embedding Josephson Junctions
within the multi-layer niobium wiring
that could be used for active circuit components,
such as on chip TWPAs.
Last, after fabrication of each of these three separate wafers,
we need to assemble the complete circuit.
To do this, we're developing a double bump bonding
approach with indium thermal compression bonding.
Indium, which is superconducting at our milliKelvin operational
temperatures, can be used both for mechanical stability
of the wafer stack and for electrical connectivity.
We align the chips using a precision bump bonder system.
We use feature in feature alignment marks, where
part of the alignment structure is on each wafer,
both during alignment, and as a check afterwards of how well we
align the two surfaces.
We have seen that we routinely achieve better than one micron
alignment between our chips.
In addition to lateral alignment,
tilt control also is critical in order
to have consistent inductive or capacitive
coupling across the vacuum gap.
Using multiple techniques, we have
demonstrated tilt control between wafers
of less than 250 micro radians.
