In this section, we'll
compare the different qubit modalities
that we just discussed.
We'll first do this in the context of the DiVincenzo
criteria and then compare the gate fidelity and the clock
rate for single-qubit and two-qubit gates.
Let's begin with a stoplight chart and the DiVincenzo
criteria.
Now, this is certainly going to be a subjective assessment.
And with all of the ongoing rapid technology development,
the actual coloring will certainly change over time.
Still, it's useful to take a snapshot of the current state
of the art to gain insight into the relative strengths
and challenges that different modalities face.
And that's our purpose here.
Our stoplight chart assigns colors to indicate progress.
Green will indicate that a modality has made the requisite
demonstrations and has sufficiently matured
to the point that we can envision it proceeding
to 100-plus qubits.
Yellow indicates that concepts or first demonstrations may
exist but that the technology is not quite ready to scale
to the 100-qubit level.
Red indicates that no realistic concepts are currently
known that would enable reaching 100 qubits.
However, we're not going to consider
any of these qubit modalities, as they're still too
nascent for our purposes here.
So you won't be seeing any red.
Starting with the first DiVincenzo criteria, D1,
scalable systems, the most mature or neutral atoms,
trapped ions, and superconducting qubits all have
demonstrated systems of 10 to tens of qubits,
with 50-qubit prototypes coming online in the near future.
Silicon, germanium, and doped silicon qubits
are yellow because they'll require high wire
counts to address their qubits, and those wires
need to be routed with high density due to the relatively
small qubit geometries.
All of these issues will need to be addressed with 3D
integration, which is only just beginning to be conceived
for these modalities.
In addition, both doped silicon and NV centers are currently
limited by the inability to implant high coherence dopants
or defects with the precision required to reach the 100-qubit
level.
Next, for initialization, D2, most technologies
are doing pretty well.
The one exception is NV centers, where
the strong laser used to initialize the qubit
will occasionally remove an electron.
This makes the defect charge neutral, effectively destroying
the qubit until it's reset.
For measurement, D3, the measurement of neutral atoms
is extremely slow and would certainly
limit the ultimate clock speed of an error-corrected system.
That's why this one is colored yellow.
In terms of D4, universal gates, the doped silicon community
has not yet reported a two-qubit gate fidelity.
For neutral atoms and silicon germanium qubits,
although their two-qubit gates have been demonstrated,
they still have a relatively low fidelity, around 80%
And that's why these are colored yellow.
In terms of coherence, D5, all of these technologies, in fact,
grade fairly well.
For D6 and D7, the interconversion
and communication of quantum information,
there's been no published work yet for silicon, germanium,
or doped silicon approaches, although it's
anticipated that a conversion to microwave photons
should follow from the same approach
as used for superconducting qubits.
Now, as we can see, both trapped ions and superconducting qubits
have made significant progress toward meeting the DiVincenzo
criteria.
This is one reason they are viewed today
as leading candidates.
Let's turn now to the gate fidelity and gate
speed of these modalities.
The number of operations before an error occurs
is directly related to the fidelity,
and they're plotted here against the gate speed
for single and two-qubit gates.
The upper right corner represents the best performance.
Additionally, it's desirable to be above the dashed red line,
which is representative of the most lenient threshold
for quantum error correction.
What we see is that trapped ions have the highest
single-qubit fidelity.
On the other hand, they are about 500 times slower
than a superconducting qubit gate.
For two-qubit gates, superconducting qubits
and trapped ions have similar levels of gate fidelity,
but again, the superconducting qubit gate is about 1,000 times
faster than the ion traps.
Some technologies, like doped silicon,
have measured and reported single-qubit gate fidelities,
but they're still working on their two-qubit gate fidelities.
Again, we can see that both trapped ions and superconducting
qubits are leading modalities today.
And in the case studies, we'll take a detailed look
at each of these technologies.
