
As you heard previously, all the required operations
for performing quantum computing with trapped ions
have been demonstrated in research groups
around the world.
However, this has been achieved in only few-qubit systems,
that is, with around 1 to 10 ions.
Perhaps the most significant obstacle
to realizing a practically useful quantum computer
is the current lack of ability to control and measure
very large numbers of ions.
And we think we'll need thousands to millions,
with the same exquisite precision demonstrated
in the few-ion systems.
This is the direction, the direction
of so-called scalability, in which the field is looking,
and in which our group at Lincoln Laboratory
is playing a leading role.
Really, there are four key things
we need to do with our trapped ion qubits.
I'd like to go through them and discuss the technology being
developed to address how we might
do each one on a large scale.
That is, on a large number of ion qubits.
First, ions need to be trapped, or held in fixed positions.
You already heard that this is done
with a combination of voltages, both static and oscillating,
that are applied to metal electrodes placed around
the positions we'd like the ions to be trapped in.
These electrodes are typically centimeter to millimeter scale,
and are made in standard machine shops.
This works well for few-ion systems, but to trap
very large arrays of ions finely detailed
and complex electrode structures are required.
And this is something very difficult to achieve
with machining techniques.
What you'd really like to utilize
are micro- or nanofabrication techniques,
like those employed for making classical computer chips,
where metal layers are deposited on wafer substrates,
like silicon or sapphire, and are subsequently
finely patterned using what is called optical lithography.
Fortunately, we've figured out a way
to use these techniques to make ion traps.
It turns out it works to unfold the electrodes normally placed
around the ion onto a plane that lies below it.
By applying a similar set of voltages
to these planar electrodes, the ion
can be trapped above the surface of the plane,
with the surface to ion distance scale being set by the size
and spacing of the electrodes.
Since these planar electrodes can
be fabricated using microchip techniques,
they can be made small, and in an arbitrary pattern.
This allows us to produce large numbers
of zones arrayed in two dimensions for large numbers
of ions to be trapped in, as well
as to reduce the size of the electrodes
to the micrometer scale.
In these types of traps, which we call surface electrode
traps, ions are typically trapped a few tens
to 100 microns above the chip surface.
An important additional benefit of these microchip
surface electrode traps is that they provide
a platform for integration of a host of other key ion control
technologies.
We basically have the potential to put anything
we can currently put in classical computer chips
and more into these ion traps.
The second key thing we need to do with our ions
is control their internal quantum states.
That is, perform the actual quantum gates or quantum
operations.
Here, I'm including the initialization steps
of cooling the motion of the ions,
as well as setting the internal electronic states in which
the ions begin a computation.
As you already heard, this is done primarily with lasers.
For the types of ions we plan to use,
we require about a dozen different laser wavelengths,
ranging from the near ultraviolet
to the near infrared, pretty much over
the whole visible spectrum.
These layers are directed and tightly
focused on the ions, which are housed inside a vacuum chamber,
through the chamber windows using
large numbers of bulk optics, like mirrors and lenses.
This is a pretty effective way to control a few ions,
but it is nearly impossible to imagine
how to use bulk optics to address a large ion array.
We need to find a way to focus a dozen different colored laser
beams on each ion in a highly controlled manner.
For example, we will want the ability
to hit one ion that resides, say,
in the middle of a large two-dimensional ion
array with one particular laser beam without hitting any
of the other ions, which would lead to some kind of operation
error.
A dream would be to plug a fiber for each color of light
we need into the chip, and have that light routed
around the chip, much like a metal trace or wire routes
electrical signals.
This light will be split up into many paths of the chip,
and then directed and focused out of the chip plane
to each ion location.
Perhaps surprisingly, this technology actually exists.
It's called integrated photonics,
and we are beginning to incorporate it into ion traps.
You can think of integrated photonics as basically fiber
optics on a chip.
These tiny fibers called waveguides
are made by depositing the right materials, which of course have
to be transparent over the visible spectrum,
onto the trap chips.
These materials are then patterned
using the same techniques used to pattern
the ion trap electrodes.
These waveguide patterns define the paths
that the laser light travels along,
and we can design them to split the light from one path
into many branches.
To get the light out of the chip and onto the ions,
we can pattern periodic gaps in the waveguide material that
act like a diffractive grating.
This grating will bounce and focus the light
into the vertical direction.
This out-coupling process works in reverse.
And it turns out to be a very effective way
of getting the light into the chip from, say,
a fiber optic cable coupled to the laser source.
At Lincoln Laboratory, in collaboration with MIT,
we've demonstrated quantum control of trapped ions
with light integrated into a surface electrode ion trap
chip.
In this case, the waveguides run below the trap's metal
electrodes, and we pattern holes in the electrodes
so that the light can get through to reach the ions.
