
Patterning superconducting qubits
requires state of art fabrication technologies.
For example, at MIT Lincoln Laboratory
we fabricate superconducting qubits
in our 70,000 square foot micro-electronics laboratory.
Within this clean room, we have a full suite
of 90 nanometers CMOS tools, and we also
have dedicated superconducting deposition and etch tools.
These dedicated superconducting tools
are essential for limiting sources
of magnetic contamination, which is
one of the sources of decoherence within qubits.
When we're fabricating superconducting qubits,
we first deposit pristine materials.
And then we work to keep them as pristine
as possible by minimizing, processing, and choosing
our parameters carefully.
Many processing steps have the potential
to introduce sources of fabrication induced loss,
and we've systematically studied ways
to mitigate this potential.
There are three main steps in our baseline superconducting
qubit fabrication process.
First, we prepare substrates and deposit a pristine layer
of superconductor, often aluminum or titanium nitride.
Second, we pattern this pristine material
into essentially everything for our superconducting qubit
circuit, other than the qubit loop.
This can include readout and control circuitry,
such as resonators that interact with the qubit, the device
ground plane, and shunt capacitors,
which can store energy from the qubits.
Third, we add our qubit loops, which
contain Josephson Junctions.
Josephson Junctions are thin oxide barriers sandwiched
between two layers of superconductor.
We often use aluminum as this qubit loop superconducting material.
After we fabricate our qubit wafers,
we conduct extensive testing of the devices.
And then we wire bonded package some chips from the wafers
to cool down and measure in our dilution fridges.
We fabricate our devices on either 200
millimeter manufacturing style wafers,
or on smaller 50 millimeter prototyping wafers.
For our 50 millimeter prototyping wafers,
we focus on quickly turning around
new designs for rapid testing.
For our 200 millimeter manufacturing scale wafers,
we focus on high yield of defect free complex designs.
We now will walk through these main process
steps in more detail, and highlight at each stage
some of the key considerations, starting with preparation
of the silicon substrate and deposition of our high quality
base metal.
Silicon substrates have a surface native oxide
that is about 1 and 1/2 nanometers thick.
The silicon oxide can contain dangling bonds,
and is a source of loss for superconducting qubits.
In order to remove this oxide, we first
do a wet chemical etch, and then we load the wafers immediately
into our molecular beam epitaxy, or MBE system.
Using the MBE, we further prepare the silicon surface
by annealing at high temperature,
and reconstructing the top monolayers of silicon.
This is a molecular beam epitaxy deposition system,
and this is critical in making superconducting qubits
because it forms a very important part of the qubit,
the very base metal.
And the metal we typically use is aluminum.
This forms the capacitors, and the wiring,
and the connections to the Josephson junctions, which
form the qubit itself.
The aluminum comes from these effusion cells, which
is a really fancy tool, but all it means
is that you have a little cone shaped crucible
where you put your aluminum in, and it's
melted through these wires around the circuitry.
And the specific amount of power that goes into it controls
the temperature of the aluminum down
to under a tenth of a degree.
That means we have precise control over the vapor
pressure of the aluminum, which means
we control how fast the aluminum film is deposited
into our tool.
And we can monitor, in situ, the growth of these aluminum
films using those high energy RHEED
gun, which stands for reflective high energy electron
diffraction What this gives us is
a two dimensional diffraction view
of the surface of the wafer.
So you can see one, the silicon wafer, two,
the desorption of the hydrogen on the silicon wafer,
and three, the deposition in real time
of the aluminum on the wafer.
Next, we pattern the high quality metal
into our shunt capacitor's control
and read out circuitry and ground plane.
We pattern a layer of optical resist
onto our superconducting base metal
to define our features of interest.
The pattern is transferred into the underlying superconducting
material using either a wet chemical etch, or a plasma etch
process.
Afterwards, we strip the resist mask using a chemical stripper.
Sources of loss within superconducting qubits
can be attributed either to the materials on our wafers
or to our fabrication processing.
As a proxy for assessing the loss within superconducting
qubits, we can use coplanar waveguide resonators.
At Lincoln Lab, we use quarter wave resonators
that are capacitively coupled to a center feed line.
We deposit the same metal as our qubit base metal, and pattern,
and etch using identical processes.
Our standard chip layout has five resonators
that are each spaced 200 megahertz apart in frequency
by varying the length of the resonators.
When cooled to milli-Kelvin temperatures, which
has passed the superconducting transition point,
we can look at loss within these resonators
as a function of photon number.
In particular, we assess performance
at the single photon limit, where on average, a single photon
is in the resonator cavity.
As of 2018, we typically see single photon quality factors
of 500,000 to one million for aluminum and one to 2.3 million
for titanium nitride.
