Another qubit technology
is based on the internal states of atoms, or neutral atoms,
as they're called, to contrast them with the ions
that we'll discuss next.
Neutral atoms can be trapped by cross-propagating optical beams,
which combine to form an egg carton-like potential.
The qubit states are hyperfine states,
resulting from an interaction between the electron
spin and the nuclear spin.
Such hyperfine transitions are driven
at very well defined microwave frequencies, commonly used
for atomic clocks.
These are highly stable qubits, and as such, their coherence
times are very long.
Thus, the gate fidelity in neutral atoms
is generally limited by control errors.
The main advantage of neutral atoms
is their long coherence times and the ability
to trap these neutral atoms in two-dimensional and even
three-dimensional arrays.
Arrays with up to 1,000 qubits have been demonstrated,
and many hundreds of atoms can be controlled with just a single
laser using an acousto optic modulator.
Another advantage is that the neutral atoms
can be moved around in real time, which
increases the achievable connectivity beyond just nearest
neighbors.
There are a few challenges, however.
One is the large laser power required
to trap and control these neutral atoms.
Another is that loading the trap is a stochastic process.
Atom rearrangement can later be made to fill in the gaps,
but it requires extra steps.
And third, neutral atoms will require integrated optics
to ultimately be scalable, something that's not yet
been implemented, although concepts
exist for its implementation.
The next example, trapped ions, are a leading qubit
modality today.
Trapped ions have been used as atomic clocks for decades,
and these systems are stable and very well characterized.
Ion qubits generally start as atoms,
with two electrons in their outermost shell,
and then one of those electrons is removed through ionization.
The qubit is realized as either an optical transition
between orbital states of this outermost electron
or a microwave transition between hyperfine states.
A primary advantage is that many of the DiVincenzo criteria
are satisfied for trapped ion qubits.
To date, arrays of 30 to 50 trapped ion qubits
have been demonstrated, and surface traps in silicon
are now being developed and used to both capture
and control these ions in a scalable manner.
The primary challenge is the 3D integration of optical
and electrical technologies into the surface traps to make them
scalable.
We'll learn more about trapped ions
and their relative advantages and challenges in the case study
at the end of this week.
