
Next we'll look at fabrication of high coherence qubit
loops and Josephson Junctions.
Starting from the patterned base metal,
our next step is to lithographically define
the region where we will deposit the qubit loops
and the embedded Josephson Junctions.
We start by depositing a stack of three layers of material.
First, we spin on a layer of methyl methacrylate
resist that we use as a spacer layer.
Second is a layer of germanium, which we use as a hard mask.
For our prototyping process on top,
we coat a layer of ZEP electron beam, or e-beam resist.
We pattern the ZEP using an electron beam lithography
system to define the qubit loops.
At Lincoln Lab we use a Raith e-beam system.
The 100 kilovolts system has a 50 megahertz
clock speed, which enables reasonable write times
of our nanometer scale patterns.
I say reasonable because we raster an electron beam back
and forth across the surface of the wafer
rather than exposing full dye at a time,
like we would do in photolithography.
This definitely is a slower process than photolithography,
but we gain patterning flexibility
for rapid prototyping.
Using our e-beam system, we have demonstrated
patterning lines down to less than 10 nanometers
on the system.
And for Josephson Junctions, we routinely
patterns sub-150 nanometer features.
Alternately, we also can pattern the qubit loops using stepper
photolithography.
For manufacturing scale wafers, at Lincoln Lab,
we use a 193 nanometer wavelength ASML
scanner, which enables us to pattern
features smaller than 100 nanometers.
Optical lithography enables orders of magnitude speed
up in write time compared to e-beam lithography,
since now we are exposing much larger write areas at a time,
rather than rastering a nanometer scale
beam across the wafer.
After the resist is exposed, by either e-beam lithography
or photolithography, we transfer the pattern
into the germanium hard mask using a plasma etch.
We use plasma etching to pattern features
on a smaller scale than what you can do with wet chemistry.
You use a gas, an ionized gas, and electric field
to etch very small metal features,
silicon features, or oxide features
to make the layers in your integrated circuit.
After etching the germanium, we etch
the spacer methyl methacrylate layer using an oxygen plasma
etch.
This exposes the silicon substrate and metal contact
regions.
In addition, this oxygen plasma simultaneously
removes the ZEP top layer of resist.
In addition to defining the open area for the qubit loops,
we also pattern small germanium bridges,
where we'll pattern the Josephson Junctions.
To release the bridges, we over-etch
and undercut the methyl methacrylate.
Zooming in on a cross-sectional view of the freestanding
germanium bridge, we can schematically
show the shadow evaporation process
used to define the Josephson Junctions.
All of the shadow evaporation steps happen in situ
within different chambers of the same vacuum system.
Since we will be making superconducting contact
between the qubit loop and our underlying base metal
capacitive shunts, we first have to prepare that base layer
by removing the metal's native oxide.
To do this, we sputter away the oxide using argon ions.
We then transfer the wafer into the deposition module
and put down the first layer of aluminum.
Afterwards, we move the wafer into the oxidation chamber,
flow in oxygen, and allow it to oxidize
the aluminum for a specific amount of time
to reach the target oxide thickness.
The target oxide thickness depends on our desired qubit
parameter for the Josephson Junction critical current.
Next, we move the wafer back into the deposition chamber,
tilt the wafer to the opposite angle,
and deposit a second layer of aluminum.
We're now located at the PLASSYS shadow evaporation
system, which is a tool that we use
for fabricating one of the critical components
of our superconducting qubits.
This is where we deposit our Josephson junctions
and the associated qubit loops that surround them.
So what we do in here is four steps.
First, we load a wafer into our load box.
Then we load it into our etch chamber
once it has pumped down to vacuum.
In this etch chamber, we first ion mill
the surface as a method to prepare it before we put down
the Josephson Junction layers.
Now in this etch chamber, we're preparing that top surface
by removing the top layer, about a nanometer of aluminum oxide,
before we come in and deposit these junctions and qubit
loops.
So then we move from the etch module
over to the deposition module.
In this module, we first put down
the bottom layer of what will define the Josephson Junctions
and qubit loops.
This connects directly to that MBE material.
From there, we move into our oxidation module.
This module's job in life is to be
able to put down very pristine, very uniform aluminum oxide
layers.
It flows in oxygen into the chamber when
we have this exposed aluminum film
and it oxidizes to a very specific thickness
that we've tuned.
From there, we move back into the deposition module.
And by tilting our stage in a different way,
we're able to use are e-beam defined shadow mask in order
to create a small layer of overlap
between the bottom layer of aluminum
that's now been oxidized and a top layer of aluminum.
That layer of overlap is specifically
the Josephson Junction for our superconducting qubit loop.
From there, the process is complete
and we move back out to the load box and take the wafers out.
After shadow evaporation, we remove the wafer
from the deposition system and lift off the resist stack
in a chemical solvent.
Once the resist is removed, wafer fabrication is complete.
The completed wafer contains the superconducting qubits
with integrated Josephson junctions,
as well as base metal pattern and capacitive
shunts, the ground plane, and readout and control circuitry.
