In this case study, we'll
take a 360 look at the trapped ion qubit modality.
Trapped ions were the first qubit technology,
and this is primarily due to their historical use
in atomic clocks and precision measurements.
Ions start as neutral atoms, the chemical elements
in the periodic table.
For example, we'll hear about strontium in this case study.
A strontium ion is formed when its outermost
electron is removed, a process called ionization.
With one less electron, the atom now has a net-positive charge,
so it's no longer charge neutral,
and we'll call this an ion.
Because the ion's charged, it can be trapped or held
in place using oscillatory electromagnetic fields.
Although these fields used to be applied
using large electrodes arranged in a three-dimensional
configuration, today they're implemented
using surface traps, electrodes manufactured
on silicon wafers that hold the ions just above the wafer
surface.
Trapped ion qubits are one of the leading modalities being
developed to realize a quantum computer,
and it has a number of advantages.
From a business perspective, trapped ions
are attractive because they leverage
a substantial existing technology
base, one that goes back three decades
to the development of atomic clocks and mass spectrometers.
In addition, trapped ions today are fundamentally
a silicon-based technology.
The surface traps themselves are fabricated on silicon wafers,
and they use standard semiconductor fabrication tools
and techniques.
In addition, all of the key control and readout circuitry
can be integrated with existing CMOS electronics.
For example, the electrode voltages
used to hold and move the ions or the integrated photonic
waveguides and gratings used to optically control the ions
and even the photodetectors used to read out the ions
are all compatible with existing CMOS foundries and materials.
And in this sense, they're lithographically
scalable to large numbers of qubits.
Today, there are a growing number
of commercial efforts pursuing and supporting
the development of trapped ion qubits,
including companies like IonQ, Quantinuum, Alpine Quantum
Technologies, and Oxford Ionics.
From an engineering perspective, the surface traps
used to capture and hold ions are
designed using standard CAD software and layout tools.
The electrode control electronics are CMOS circuits,
and they're designed in the same way as conventional CMOS
electronics.
Similarly, the photonic waveguides and couplers
are designed and integrated directly into the silicon.
Scientifically, state of the art trapped ion quantum processors
have demonstrated several prototype quantum algorithms,
such as Shor's algorithm at the 10 qubit level,
and larger scale circuits at the several tens of qubits level
have been used to encode logical qubits
and even perform certain logical operations.
Although trapped ions operate more slowly than superconducting
qubits, they've demonstrated a larger degree of connectivity
between the ions, and this may help
to offset the relatively slow speed by making problem
embedding more efficient.
And finally, from a technology standpoint, trapped ion qubits
leverage both microwave and data communications technology.
The lasers used in trapped ion experiments
have application to atomic clocks, precision navigation,
even biology and optogenetics.
Developing compact instrumentation,
for example, size, weight, power, even cost,
will benefit an array of technologies,
even beyond trapped ions.
And so, with that brief introduction,
let's now hear from the experts, who
will present a 360 view of trapped ion qubits.
