
One of the neat things about superconducting qubits
is that they are macroscopic things,
but they act a lot like atoms.
They have discrete energy levels and you
can couple them to cavities just like you can with atoms.
With atoms you have cavity quantum electrodynamics,
or cavity QED, that describes how light in a cavity
interacts with atoms.
And with superconducting qubits you
have circuit QED, which describes how light in a cavity
interacts with superconducting circuits.
The math is basically the same.
But unlike with atoms where you're
limited to whatever's on the periodic table,
with superconducting qubits you can engineer the energy levels
to be whatever you want by changing
the values of the capacitors and the sizes and numbers
of the Josephson Junctions.
This is why superconducting circuits are sometimes
called artificial atoms.
Because they're like atoms but you
can engineer their energy levels.
Here's a picture of a fabricated superconducting qubit.
The two squares of metal make up the capacitor.
In between them is a loop of superconducting material
that has JJs in it.
In this type of qubit it's easiest to think
of the information being encoded in currents moving
clockwise and counterclockwise.
To control the qubit we can send in a pulse of microwave energy
at the qubit's frequency.
The phase and length of the control pulse
will determine how much the qubit rotates around the x
and y-axes of the block sphere.
So this instrument is called an arbitrary waveform generator.
And this you can think of as essentially the central command
for the experiments.
So these are what we're going to load
our qubit pulses, our entangling pulses, and our readout pulses
in.
So it's going to send, for example, your INQ signals
to your qubit.
It could also send an and INQ signal to your readouts.
So this would be sufficient to control
at minimum, a single qubit.
By multiplexing, that is by sending signals
at multiple frequencies down the same lines,
we can actually use a unit like this
to control multiple qubits at the same time.
Typical single qubit control pulses
are tens of nanoseconds, which is very short compared
to the best coherence times of 100 microseconds
and fidelities greater than 99.9% have been achieved.
Now, we also need to be able to do two qubit gates between two
superconducting qubits.
There are lots of ways to couple of superconducting qubits
to each other, including coupling them directly
to each other through a capacitive, or inductive
interaction, or mediating the coupling with a resonator
or another qubit.
In many coupling schemes, it's necessary to change the energy
levels of the qubits, which we can
do by changing the magnetic flux through the loop.
To qubit gate times range from tens
to hundreds of nanoseconds.
And gate fidelities greater than 99% have been demonstrated.
Now, at some point in our quantum algorithm
we also need to be able to get information out of the qubit.
One common way of doing this is to couple it
to a linear resonator, like the harmonic oscillator
we talked about before.
In this picture, we see a qubit coupled to a readout resonator.
Previously, we talked about using
an inductor and a capacitor to make a resonator.
But in this case, we're just taking a microwave transmission
line that has a distributed inductance and capacitance
and is also a resonator.
The qubit interacts with a resonator
just like an atom interacts with a cavity.
And we end up shifting the resonator frequency
by a different amount if the qubit is in the zero
state or the one state.
So by sending a pulse of microwave energy
to interrogate the resonator, we can
learn the state of the qubit.
Readout times vary but can be as short
as hundreds of nanoseconds.
