
We use individual charged atoms, or atomic ions,
as quantum information carriers in our development
of a large-scale quantum information processor.
Starting with neutral atoms with two electrons
in the outermost level, we can remove one of these electrons,
producing an ion with a positive charge
that we can hold onto very tightly using
electromagnetic fields.
In machines like these, we can trap
individual atoms, the smallest amount of an element--
in our case, strontium or things like calcium--
that you can.
That's one atom.
That's something like smaller than a tenth of a nanometer.
And we manipulate them with lasers
and electromagnetic fields such that we
can hold onto them for many hours
and manipulate their quantum states to do things
like quantum information processing.
So in an individual trapped ion, the amount of time
that the quantumness survives, or the coherence time,
can be made to be very long.
In systems like this, where people manipulate trapped ions
on a regular basis, this coherence time
can be seconds, even minutes.
And this allows us to do lots of coherent quantum operations
between larger numbers of qubits in the amount of time
that you have available to do anything with those quantum
systems.
Other advantages are that the error rates in the quantum
operations that we perform--
single qubit, double qubit operations
that are keys to quantum information processing, as well
as preparation and readout of the quantum states--
can be done with very low error rate in trapped ion systems.
Because these atomic systems are very clean, single quantum
systems that we can control very well,
we can theoretically predict exactly how
they're going to behave.
We know where they are, and we can manipulate their states
very, very cleanly.
We've now defined our qubit state within a single ion,
but how do we hold on to one atom?
Utilizing the positive charge of the ion,
we can trap it in a combination of static and dynamic electric
fields.
By applying a radio frequency electric field
to two diametrically opposed rods out
of a four-rod square configuration,
we can produce a quadripolar field in two dimensions.
At any one moment in time, this field
will tend to push an ion toward the center of the trap in one
dimension and push it away in the other.
But since this field oscillates in time,
for the right combination of frequency and amplitude,
the ion can effectively be pushed
toward the center in all directions
as if it were in a two-dimensional bowl.
In the third dimension, we can apply
a combination of static voltages to trap the ion.
This is the same technology used for mass spectrometry,
and we see potential offshoots of ion quantum information
processing in improvement to small sample
sensing and identification.
A promising approach to large-scale ion control
and manipulation is based on chip-based traps,
as shown here.
By patterning metal using standard microfabrication
techniques onto an insulating substrate,
we can produce a flat version of the four-rod trap
structure I just described.
As we'll describe in a bit, ions are trapped in space
above the center of the trap where the quadripolar trapping
field is produced.
To hold onto an individual ion for a long time,
a very low pressure environment is
required, as molecules in the air
have sufficient energy to knock the ions out of the trap.
Ultra high vacuum conditions with background pressures
more than 12 orders of magnitude less
than standard atmospheric pressure
can be maintained in specialized chambers.
These extremely low pressures are produced in our laboratory
by means of cryopumping, in which various surfaces
in the chamber are made very cold,
within a few degrees of absolute zero,
by means of refrigeration.
Much as water condenses from the air
onto a cold beverage container on a humid day,
cryopumping results in condensation of almost all
of air's constituents, quickly and dramatically
lowering the pressure in the closed vacuum chamber.
Ions can be maintained for hours to days in UHV systems
like this.
It is important to point out that the ions themselves
are not cooled in this manner.
They're cooled to much lower temperatures,
eventually to only a few tens of millionths of a degree
above absolute zero, by the use of lasers.
Perhaps counterintuitively, it is
possible to remove motional energy from atoms
by allowing them to absorb light at a very particular frequency,
after which they re-emit light at a slightly
higher frequency, leading to a reduction in motional energy.
This laser cooling process, developed 30 years ago,
is a key enabling technology for quantum computing
with atomic systems.
This animation shows the process by which we get individual ions
into the trap.
Inside the vacuum system, we heat up
a piece of metal to a few hundred degrees Celsius,
producing hot atomic vapor.
Using a combination of laser beams and a magnetic field
gradient, we cool approximately a million neutral atoms
into what is known as a magneto-optical trap.
These cold atoms can then be accelerated toward the ion trap
chip using another laser beam.
With the radio frequency trapping potential applied
to the trap electrodes, neutral atoms that are ionized,
using other lasers within the trapping volume,
will feel the trapping fields and be
localized within the trap, where they are cooled
with yet another set of lasers, these ones
resonant with transitions in the ion.
The result is a single atom held in space
approximately 50 micrometers from the surface of the chip.
We can image the ions using the light
they scatter during cooling, producing images
like that shown here.
