
Once we have the ions, how do we manipulate the qubits?
Single-qubit gates are brought about
by applying laser pulses resonant
with the qubit transition for a certain amount of time.
If the qubit starts in the ground state
as a function of the laser pulse duration,
the qubit state coherently oscillates between the ground
state and the excited state, performing what
are known as Rabi oscillations.
By choosing the appropriate time to stop the Rabi oscillations,
we could perform a flip of the quantum state
from 0 to 1 producing a quantum version of the classical NOT
gate, or the inverter.
This is how we perform a pi pulse.
Interestingly, if we use a laser pulse
half as long as a pi pulse to perform a pi over 2 pulse, that
is a gate with no classical analog,
we produce in the ion qubit a superposition state,
0 and 1 at the same time, where the electron is effectively
in two states at once.
These manipulations form the basis
of single-qubit operations on ion qubits.
Along with single-qubit gates, 2-qubit gates
are required to do arbitrary quantum computations.
We bring about these operations by means of the strong Coulomb
interaction between two positively-charged ions.
Two ions in the same trap share vibrational modes
due to their interaction, much like two balls with a spring
connecting them.
And these modes can be excited, depending
on their internal qubit states, using laser beams.
Thus the internal qubit states can
be entangled through the quantum vibrational mode
channel used as a quantum bus.
The basic 2-qubit gate is a controlled NOT gate,
somewhat analogous to a classical exclusive OR gate.
And it can be produced using this bus interaction
in combination with a few single-qubit gates,
as I just described.
If one ion starts in an equal superposition state,
the state after application of a controlled NOT gate
will be a maximally entangled state,
capable of effects like what Einstein called
"spooky action at a distance.”
Not only is this spooky action really
the way entangled systems work, as verified many times
in laboratories around the world,
it is also a fundamental component
that large-scale quantum computers will rely on
for their operation.
Finally, after a series of single and 2-qubit operations
as you would perform to carry out an algorithm,
the quantum state of the ion qubit must be measured.
Ions allow a particularly good mechanism
for high-fidelity state readout, when
compared with other systems.
By illuminating the ion with light resonant
with an auxiliary transition, we cause
the ion to absorb and re-emit light on this transition
if it is measured in one state, whereas the light will
be off-resonant if it is measured to be in the zero state,
and the ion will be dark.
The ion state may have been in a superposition
before the measurement, but during illumination, the state
will be projected to 0 or 1 and remain there.
This forms a quantum non-demolition measurement,
allowing us to scatter many photons
and get good statistics on the ion state.
By setting a threshold on the number of photons
we detect from the ion during measurement
using a single photon-sensitive detector,
we can measure the ion's state with very high fidelity.
We therefore have established techniques
to perform all the operations required for quantum computing
using trapped ions, and the properties
of the ions themselves allow for very
low error on these operations.
In fact, researchers in the field of trapped ion quantum
computing have demonstrated basic quantum computing
primitives in few ion experiments that
approach or surpass the fidelity levels we think we need
for useful large-scale systems.
Coherence times for a single ion have
been shown to be in the neighborhood of 10
minutes, quite a long time for quantum properties
to persist, even becoming comparable to human time
scales.
Single-qubit gates, with errors at the one in a million level,
have been achieved using microwave fields.
And 2-qubit gate fidelities are at the 99.9 percent level
in experiments performed by a few different groups.
In addition, a few tens of ions have
been trapped and individually manipulated as well, though not
simultaneously with the highest fidelity gates.
The remaining challenge, therefore,
is to maintain the exquisite level of quantum control
that has been shown to be possible,
while scaling systems to many ions.
This must include providing control and readout capability
for arrays of ions without simply multiplying up
the number and size of the bulk optics
and external electronics setups used today--
equipment which can take up a small room.
This is an exciting area of current research.
And at Lincoln Laboratory and MIT,
we are taking this challenge head on.
