
The next stage is room temperature testing.
At Lincoln Lab we do extensive automated testing
on every wafer that we fabricate.
We conduct data-driven process monitoring
to assess device performance and drive our process development.
We test each component of our superconducting qubit system.
Two examples include checking the critical current density
of the Josephson junctions and measuring the contact
resistance between the base metal
and the qubit loop shadow evaporated metal.
Each wafer is tested using an automated wafer probing
station.
After we load the wafer, we do thousands of four point probe
measurements using a 26-pin probe card in combination
with a switch matrix.
At each probing location, we apply current
to a four-wire test structure and measure the voltage drop.
The switch matrix re-assigns the current end voltage locations
for all test structures accessible to the 26-pin probe
card.
And then the probe card is lifted and transferred
to a new position where the measurements continue.
After testing is complete, the results
are automatically databased.
In addition, some devices can be selected
for further cryogenic testing, either
at liquid helium temperature of 4.2 Kelvin
or at melee Kelvin temperatures in one of our dilution fridges.
As one example of our room temperature testing,
we measure the resistance of Josephson Junctions
with varying junction lengths ranging from 100 nanometers
to three microns.
We plot the inverse of the resistance,
which is the conductance, as a function of the junction
length.
We use the slope of that plot to extract out
the low temperature critical current density, JC, of our wafer.
On our prototyping 50 millimeter wafers,
we measure the critical current density
at six identically patterned process monitor chip locations
spread across the wafer.
In this example, we targeted a critical current density
of three micrograms per micron squared.
We met that target average critical current density
and also had less than 2% cross-wafer variation.
In a second example of our test structures,
we measure contact resistance between our metal layers.
Here I show a false color scanning electron microscope
image of contact between the base MBE aluminum metal
in blue and the top shadow evaporated Josephson Junction
metal in orange.
Additionally, we also check for continuity of millimeter
long snaking lines and isolation between interdigitated combs.
We use these measurements to check for any particle defects
and for consistency of lithographic patterning.
After testing, the last step is to select wafers
for dicing and packaging.
Wafers are diced using an automated water-cooled dicing
saw.
The qubit chips are then packaged and wire bonded
to make connections from the outside cabling
to the chip circuitry.
From there, our chips are loaded into one of our dilution
fridges for measurement.
