
In this case study, we'll
take a closer look at superconducting qubits.
Superconducting qubits are electrical circuits
built from inductors, capacitors, and Josephson tunnel
junctions that, when cooled to millikelvin temperatures,
exhibit quantum mechanical behavior.
In fact, it's often said that superconducting qubits
are artificial atoms.
And what's meant by that is that these circuits can
be designed to have properties similar to atoms.
For example, the energy level separation
between state 0 and state 1, or their sensitivity
to environmental noise, can all be determined by design.
And this is quite different than qubits based on elements
that we find in the periodic table,
where you basically have to go with what nature provides.
Today, superconducting qubits are
one of the leading modalities being developed
to realize a quantum computer, and there
are a number of advantages.
From a business perspective, superconducting qubits
are attractive because they leverage a substantial existing
technology base.
For example, superconducting qubits
are fundamentally a silicon technology.
They're fabricated on silicon wafers.
They use standard semiconductor fabrication tools
and techniques.
And the materials, like aluminum or titanium nitride,
are fully compatible with CMOS foundries.
In this sense, they're lithographically
scalable to large numbers of qubits.
From an engineering perspective, superconducting qubits
are designed in much the same way
as classical transistor-based circuits.
They use the same kinds of CAD software
for layout and simulation, and have
many of the same considerations as larger scale computer chips.
For example, when routing wires to and from the devices.
Scientifically, state of the art superconducting quantum
processors are pushing 1,000 qubits,
and this is at a level where even the largest foreseeable
classical computers, let alone the ones we have today,
simply would not be able to simulate that quantum computers
behavior or its output.
When this happens, we'll have reached
a point that's often referred to as quantum supremacy,
a point where a quantum computer has performed
a task that could not be calculated exactly
on a classical computer.
And finally, from a technology standpoint,
superconducting qubits leverage and rely
on existing technologies, such as microwave control electronics
and microwave packaging, often using the same frequency bands
used in cell phone electronics.
And so, with that brief introduction,
let's now hear from the experts, who'll
present a 360 view of superconducting qubits.
