Until this point in the course,
we've generally talked about qubits
as quantum mechanical two-level systems.
But how do we physically realize a qubit in practice,
and what are the leading physical realizations today?
In this section, we'll have a general introduction
to several candidate qubit technologies.
Later, we'll present an in-depth look
at two of the leading qubit modalities.
Let's start with electron spin.
As we saw in the introduction to quantum parallelism and quantum
interference, the electron spin has two states,
spin up and spin down.
The question is, how to isolate a single electron.
In this first example, the electron spin
is trapped in a quantum dot, a small region of semiconductor
material where a single electron can be trapped.
We start with a two dimensional sheet of electrons, called a two
dimensional electron gas, or two deg for short, which
can be realized at the interface of a slab of silicon
and a slab of silicon germanium.
Metallic gates are then defined on the surface of the device
to electrostatically define the quantum dot region,
and by applying the appropriate gate voltages,
a single electron spin can be trapped there.
Combinations of microwaves and baseband pulses
are then used to implement quantum gates.
Now, in addition to the single dot shown here,
there are also more complex designs,
including double dots, triple dots, and even
dots based on CMOS devices, each of which
adds complexity to gain certain advantages.
In general, the main attraction of quantum dots
is that, one, they leverage advanced silicon fabrication
technology.
Two, they're relatively small in area, and so in principle
can be integrated to large numbers.
And three, much like CMOS, they controlled using gate voltages.
The main challenge is that multiple gates are required
to define a single qubit.
And so 3D integration techniques will certainly be required
to realize large scale circuits.
Another example of an electron spin qubit
is in phosphorus doped silicon.
Here, phosphorus atoms are implanted in the silicon
substrate, and the spin of its outermost electron
serves as the qubit.
And as with quantum dots, electrostatic gates
are used to control the qubits, using
a combination of baseband, RF, and microwave pulses.
The main advantages of phosphorus doped silicon
are that it also leverages silicon fabrication
technologies, and the electron spin qubit
has very long coherence times.
The primary challenge is that the dopants
must be in very close proximity to one
another, around 10 nanometers, in order
to have a sufficiently large two qubit coupling
to implement a two qubit gate.
This makes it extremely challenging
to place the gates and route the wires required
to control the qubits.
It also means that crosstalk between control lines and qubits
will be significant.
Again, 3D integration will be required here.
A second challenge is that the phosphorus dopants must
be implanted in the silicon with very high precision,
and this remains an outstanding challenge.
Phosphorus dopants also have a nuclear spin
that can be used as a qubit, which is controlled using
radio frequency or RF pulses.
The main advantage of nuclear spin qubits
is their extremely long coherence times,
which arise because the spins are largely decoupled
from their environment.
The trade off, though, is that the gate times are rather slow.
A second system that affords both an electron
spin and a nuclear spin is the nitrogen vacancy center
in diamond.
Diamond is formed from a tetrahedral lattice
of carbon atoms.
Occasionally, however, a defect interrupts this lattice,
and one example is called a nitrogen vacancy,
in which a nitrogen atom is injected into the lattice
and causes the carbon vacancy to form.
The result is an extra pair of electrons,
which form a spin system whose lowest two spin levels can
be used as the qubit.
Alternatively, the nuclear spin of the nitrogen atom
or of the surrounding carbon atoms
may also be used as a qubit.
The electron spin is addressed by a combination of microwave
pulses to implement the quantum control and lasers to initialize
and measure the qubit.
The nuclear spin has a magnetic field dependent splitting
that is controlled at radio frequencies,
and in fact, although they can be used as qubits,
NV centers really shine as quantum sensors
of magnetic fields due to this sensitivity.
The advantage of NV centers is that they are rather well suited
to the interconversion and communication of quantum
information, and they also have reasonably long coherence times.
They can even be operated at room temperature,
albeit with some lower coherence.
The primary challenge for NV centers is their scalability.
While few qubit spin clusters, local to a single NV center,
have been demonstrated, currently it's
not possible to place high coherence nitrogen
vacancies in precise locations to create large qubit arrays.
