
The next example, superconducting qubits,
are manufactured artificial atoms.
Unlike the previous examples based on spins
in naturally occurring atoms, superconducting qubits
are electrical circuits that behave like atoms.
Essentially, superconducting qubits
are nonlinear oscillators built from inductors and capacitors.
The inductor is realized by a Josephson junction, a nonlinear
inductor that makes the resonator anharmonic.
As we'll learn in the following case study,
anharmonic oscillators feature an addressable two level system
that we'll call the qubit.
The qubit states can either be states
of phase across the Josephson junction,
flux in a superconducting loop, or even charge on a junction
island.
The main advantages of superconducting qubits
are that the gates are fast compared with the other qubits,
and they're manufactured on silicon wafers
using materials and tools common to CMOS foundries.
To date, arrays of up to 1,000 qubits have been demonstrated
at IBM.
And Google Quantum AI used a 200-qubit array to demonstrate
the scaling of quantum error correction to larger and larger
codes.
The main challenge is the integration
of control and readout technologies
that maintain qubit coherence even
at millikelvin temperatures.
We'll learn more about these challenges, advantages,
and the current state of the art in the following case study.
Finally, there are several other qubit modalities
being pursued that are at various stages of development
and maturity.
The most developed and mature include linear optics
quantum computing, where the presence or absence of a photon
constitutes the qubit.
Quantum information is processed using linear optical components
like beam splitters, phase shifters, mirrors,
and interferometers.
Effective nonlinear interactions are
achieved through the use of single photon sources,
photodetectors, and the like.
The main challenge with linear optical quantum computing
is that it's very hard to make photons interact with one
another.
In addition, high fidelity memory is a big challenge,
and many schemes rely on probabilistic sources and gates
to process information.
Another type of quantum computer based on neutral atoms
is a quantum emulator.
A quantum emulator uses Rydberg atoms,
or Bose-Einstein condensates to emulate a condensed matter
or atomic system through the use of tailored atomic energies
and coupling terms.
A more exotic qubit modality that
is generating significant interest today
is based on something called a Majorana fermion, a fermion
that is its own antiparticle.
Several efforts worldwide are trying
to realize a Majorana qubit, using a combination
of superconducting and semiconducting
materials, which feature a strong spin orbit interaction.
If successfully realized, Majorana qubits
have been theoretically shown to exhibit topological protection,
a resilience to noise that's not unlike the resilience afforded
by quantum error correction.
The challenge is that they're extremely difficult to realize,
and to date, there's been no definitive demonstration
of a Majorana qubit featuring this topological protection.
Other qubit candidates include molecular ions,
which are trapped and controlled in a manner
similar to atomic ions, and electrons
on liquid helium, which are basically free electrons that
form an electron lattice on the surface of liquid helium
and can be controlled using electron spin resonance
techniques.
