
We often say that superconducting qubits
are artificial atoms.
What we mean by that is that we can build electrical circuits
that behave much like the natural atoms
on the periodic table.
For these artificial atoms, we can
design all of their properties-- their energy level
spacing, their sensitivity to noise, and so on.
This is quite different than qubits based on natural atoms,
where we're limited to what we're given by nature.
And so a key advantage of superconducting qubits
is that we design these superconducting quantum
circuits and their properties.
A second advantage is that superconducting qubits
are a silicon technology.
We manufacture superconducting qubits
on silicon wafers using the same tools--
photolithography, metal deposition, metal etch--
that are used by industry to make
Complementary Metal-Oxide-Semiconductor,
or CMOS, transistors.
The active elements we use, Josephson Junctions,
have thin oxide barriers, just like the thin gates
of transistors.
Even the metals we use-- aluminum, titanium nitride,
niobium--
are all compatible with CMOS fabrication.
And so in a very real sense, superconducting qubits
are a silicon technology.
And this affords us lithographic scalability.
It's a straightforward path to increasingly complex circuitry
with many interconnected qubits.
There are a few differences related to the specific process
temperatures and other processing parameters that
are used for CMOS and for superconducting qubits.
And this is related primarily to the need for pristine materials
and fabrication in order to maintain high qubit coherence.
Superconducting qubits have a variety of ways
they can lose quantum information,
or what we call decoherence.
Several examples of decoherence channels
are illustrated here, including charges fluctuating
on the device surface, trapped magnetic vortices,
and stray magnetic or electrical fields.
Many of these channels can be enhanced and suppressed
by the materials and fabrication choices
we make in manufacturing superconducting qubits,
as well as by their design.
Research within the superconducting qubit community
for the last 20 years has focused
on identifying and mitigating sources of decoherence
in order to improve qubit performance
with tremendous success.
We've seen more than five orders of magnitude improvement
in qubit coherence within these 20 years.
In 2018, multiple major modalities
of superconducting qubits with unique parameters tuned
for different applications have achieved coherence times
that exceed the most lenient thresholds for quantum error
correction.
This is one of the reasons superconducting
qubits are at the forefront of demonstrations today.
