
The DiVincenzo criteria articulated the requirements
that a qubit technology must have in order
to be a viable candidate for the physical implementation
of a quantum computer.
In this section, we'll build on two of those criteria, related
to qubit robustness and quantum gates,
in order to define metrics that will
allow us to compare qubit modalities with one another.
To do this, let's first look, in more detail,
at the qubit coherence time, the analog of the mean time
to failure for a transistor.
Quantum computers, like classical computers,
must be built from robust elements.
The coherence time is one metric that
quantifies the robustness of a quantum bit.
Essentially, it's the amount of time,
on average, that a qubit state’s maintained before the quantum
state is lost.
As an illustration, let's consider a qubit
that we set into a quantum state psi,
and consider what happens to that qubit over time.
At first, the state is well-defined,
we just put it in that state, we're
confident that we did a good job,
and so we know what the state is.
Over time, however, the qubit begins
to interact with its environment.
And when it does so, the qubit experiences
noise that alters the qubit state in ways
that we didn't anticipate.
Intuitively, we can imagine that the state begins to blur.
And as time goes on, and the qubit
is subject to more of this environmental noise,
eventually, we can no longer recognize the state,
and the quantum information is fully lost.
Now of course, the qubit is still there,
but it's no longer in the state that we
would have expected it to be in after this amount of time.
The noise has altered the behavior of the qubit,
and it's now in some other state.
Let's now look in more detail at how
we quantify qubit lifetimes, by looking
at errors on the Bloch Sphere.
There are two fundamental ways in which a qubit
loses quantum information.
The first is energy relaxation.
Imagine that we put the qubit in its excited state, state 1.
Unfortunately, it probably won't stay there,
due to noise at the qubit frequency, the qubit will,
at some point, lose its energy to the environment
and return to the ground state.
This loss of energy is called energy relaxation,
and on average, it occurs after a time called t-1.
The second way a qubit can lose quantum information
is through a loss of phase coherence.
Imagine that we intentionally set the qubit at one point
on the equator of the Bloch Sphere.
It likely won't stay in that direction forever,
due to interactions with the environment.
And there are two ways that phase coherence can be lost.
First, the qubit state may move around on the equator,
due to the environmental noise.
If we repeat the experiment many times,
sometimes the noise will drive the Bloch vector east
along the equator, sometimes to the west, and over time,
the Bloch vector fans out more and more.
It does this until, eventually, we
can no longer tell which direction,
or equivalently, which phase, the Bloch vector has.
And the average time it takes for this to happen
is called the pure dephasing time, t-phi.
Now there's another way things can go wrong on the equator.
Remember that, on the equator, the qubit
is in a superposition state of 0 and 1,
with 1 being the excited state.
If that component of the superposition state
loses its energy to the environment,
then the 1 state flips to 0, and the superposition state
is lost.
Essentially, the qubit's relaxed from the equator
to the north pole.
Energy relaxation is also a phase breaking process,
since once the Bloch vector points to the north pole,
we can no longer tell which way it had been pointing
on the equator, that phase information
is lost to the environment.
Thus, the average amount of time that a qubit remains coherent
is related to both the dephasing time, t-phi, and the energy
relaxation time, t-1, which together, give a time t-2,
over which phase coherence is lost.
Thus, a qubit loses its quantum information
by two mechanisms, energy relaxation and loss of phase
coherence, characterized, respectively,
by the times t-1 and t-2.
Now another important metric for quantum computers,
just as with classical computers,
is the clock speed, the time required
to perform a quantum operation.
This is called the gate time, and although it generally
differs for single and two qubit gates,
we can use a typical time, or conservatively,
use the slowest gate time, to define the clock
speed with which we can operate the quantum computer.
And as with all computers, faster is better.
Even if we have an exponential speed
up from a quantum algorithm, it still takes some time
to perform that algorithm, and all else being equal,
a faster clock speed will translate
to obtaining the answer more quickly.
A key figure of merit, then, is the number
of gates one can perform within the qubit lifetime.
The more gates one can implement before an error occurs,
the larger an algorithm one can run.
This metric also illustrates an interesting trade off
with qubits.
In general, qubits with long lifetimes
have less interaction with their environment.
That's good, because they have less sensitivity to noise.
But the trade off is that they also respond more slowly,
even when we intentionally try to control them.
This is because they're not just weakly interacting
with their environment, they're also weakly interacting
with our control fields.
Similarly, qubits that more strongly interact
with their environment may have shorter coherence times,
but they generally also respond faster.
In fact, the number of gates one can perform, on average,
before an error occurs may not differ
much between these two cases.
However, one of these qubit modalities
may have a much faster clock speed than the other one,
and that's a good thing.
This figure of merit, the average number of gates one
can perform before an error occurs,
is a proxy for a more general and rigorous concept, called
gate fidelity, which we'll discuss next.
