WILL OLIVER: A third type of quantum computer
is called a quantum annealer, and it's
used solely to solve classical optimization problems.
BO EWALD: Optimization problems are those that--
we face them every day.
What is the best way for you to be able to drive home at night
when there's traffic?
What is the best way to route aircraft around an airport?
All of those are optimization problems.
[RADIO CHATTER]
DENNY DAHL: If you're planning a very complicated mission,
A space mission with a lot of moving
parts that involve material, people, gasoline,
if you can optimize and improve the efficiency of something
like that, quantum computing could have a huge impact.
WILL OLIVER: Quantum annealers do not use digital gates.
Instead, an optimization problem is encoded directly
into the qubits and their connectivity to one another,
and also by the strength of those connections.
Finding the qubit states that then minimize their total energy
is equivalent to optimizing and finding the answer
to an encoded problem.
However, how do we anneal these qubits
into states that minimize their energy?
BO EWALD: So the name, "quantum annealing,"
is related to making a sword where you take a piece of metal
and then you heat it up.
And in the old days, a swordsmith
would beat the sword into some shape,
and then would cool it, quench it in water, perhaps, heat it up
again, and then beat it into shape,
and do that multiple times.
And that was called an annealing process.
So heat it up, cool it down, heat it up, cool it down.
Quantum computing uses a similar technique.
WILL OLIVER: To perform annealing, we
start by setting the qubit states and their couplings
to one another in a configuration where
we know the ground state.
Let's call this the starting configuration, or alternatively
its starting Hamiltonian.
We then slowly change the qubits in their couplings
from those in the starting Hamiltonian
to those in the encoded problem Hamiltonian.
Now if we make these changes slowly enough,
it's likely that we'll remain in or very near the ground
state of the system so that by the end of this evolution,
the qubits are in their ground state,
and that represents the solution to our optimization problem.
BO EWALD: If you have a problem that you
can craft as a landscape, like the Alps,
for example, what our computer does
is without adding or subtracting,
it would find the lowest valley or valleys in that landscape
probably.
It's probabilistic, and, again, doesn't add or subtract,
but rather, what it's really doing
is not a three-dimensional version of the Alps,
but it's an n-dimensional energy landscape,
and it's finding a low-energy solution to that problem.
WILL OLIVER: The challenge is that for problems of interesting size
and complexity, it's almost certain that no matter how
slowly we change these parameters,
the annealer will, at some point, leave its ground state.
This is due to the larger number of energy states
and their close proximity to one another.
And as a result, quantum annealers
must find additional mechanisms to return the computer
to the ground state.
For example, through quantum tunneling,
or by introducing excess relaxation,
a loss of energy that returns the computer to its ground
state.
BO EWALD: If you hit a barrier, like a mountain range,
as we described earlier, what our machine does
is rather than you having to put more energy to climb
the mountainside and go down the other side,
we use the quantum mechanical property of tunneling,
and we tunnel through the barrier
to get to what should be a lower energy
solution in the next valley, if you will.
WILL OLIVER: On the other hand, add too much relaxation
and the computer may not even be quantum mechanical anymore.
As a result, it's currently unknown
if a quantum annealer can exhibit quantum enhancement
for a general class of optimization problems.
It may just represent another type of classical computer.
And although, as a classical computer,
it would not scale well with the size of the problem,
it may still be interesting if it were substantially faster
than any of today's transistor-based classical
computers.
BO EWALD: There are technical challenges
facing quantum computing.
For our quantum annealing computers,
how do we scale them up to be able to start attacking
more real-world problems instead of subsets
of real-world problems?
WILL OLIVER: There's a strong interest in quantum annealers
because classical optimization problems are everywhere,
from supply transport optimization,
to sensor and satellite tasking, pattern recognition,
needle-in-a-haystack problems, et cetera.
Many, many problems can be reduced to optimization.
And so there's a large application
pull to understand quantum annealers better.
