
Classical computers can perform arbitrary Boolean logic
with a small set of single-bit and two-bit gates.
For example, the NOT gate, in combination with the AND gate,
is considered universal in that it can, in principle, implement
any classical algorithm that uses binary logic.
Similarly, quantum algorithms can
be run on quantum computers using a small, universal set
of single and two-qubit gates.
Let's begin with an example of a single-qubit gate called
the X-gate and its classical analog, the NOT gate.
A NOT gate takes one bit as its input and it inverts it.
For example, a 0 at the input is inverted to state 1,
and a 1 at the input is inverted to state 0.
The quantum analog of this gate is
called the X-gate, which takes a quantum state as its input,
in this case state 0, and rotates it to state 1
or it takes state 1 and rotates it to state 0.
We can represent this operation on the Bloch Sphere
with state 0 at the North Pole and state 1 at the South Pole.
On the right, we see an envelope of the pulse
that we're using to drive the X-gate.
We call this a pi pulse, because it will rotate the Bloch
vector representing the state of the qubit from the North Pole
to the South Pole, a rotation of 180 degrees.
The red arrow that comes in and out of the screen of the Bloch
Sphere represents the envelope of the pulse
that we're using to drive this operation.
And visually, much like the spokes of an umbrella
will rotate around the umbrella's central axis
when you twist its handle, the Bloch vector
rotates around the axis to which we're applying the pulse.
In this case, since this pulse is
applied along the x-axis of the Bloch Sphere,
this is why we call the operation an X-gate.
Now as we show it here, we're rotating from the North Pole
to the South Pole from state 0 to state 1.
In this configuration, this is simply a classical operation,
but the X-gate can do much more.
The X-gate can take as its input any superposition state, that
is any starting point on the Bloch Sphere
and rotate it around the x-axis by 180 degrees.
This is a quantum mechanical operation.
The qubit starts in a superposition state,
and it ends in a superposition state.
And what the X-gate essentially does is take the input quantum
state, alpha 0 plus beta 1, and swaps
the coefficients to generate an output
state, beta 0 plus alpha 1.
The X-gate is one of a handful of standard single-qubit gates
that rotate the qubit state around a few different axes
on the Bloch Sphere.
Let's now consider an example of a two-qubit gate,
the controlled NOT gate, or CNOT-gate,
and its classical analog, the exclusive OR, or the XOR-gate.
XOR takes two bits as inputs, bit x and y.
We'll call bit x the control bit and bit y the target bit.
The truth table for XOR shows the output states
of all four possible input state combinations.
For example, when the control bit x is in its 0 state,
the target bit y, whether a 0 or a 1, remains unchanged
and its value is just passed to the output.
However, when control bit x is set to state 1,
the target bit y is inverted.
0 becomes 1 and 1 becomes 0.
The quantum analog of this gate is the CNOT-gate,
and it takes as inputs qubit x and qubit y.
Again, we'll call x the control bit and y the target bit.
When qubit x is in state 0, qubit y remains unchanged.
But when qubit x is in state 1, qubit y
undergoes a pi rotation, a rotation of 180 degrees.
This means that the rotation of qubit y
depends on the state of qubit x.
We can consider an interesting example
where x, the control qubit, is in an equal superposition of 0
and 1 and y, the target qubit, is in state 0.
To determine the output, let's take it one piece at a time.
When x is in state 0, y remains unchanged.
And when x is in state 1, the qubit y
undergoes a rotation of 180 degrees
that flips state 0 to state 1.
The resulting output state, 0, 0, plus 1, 1,
is a very interesting state because it cannot be factorized
into an x component  cross a y component.
This type of state is entangled, and an entangled state
is a manifestly quantum mechanical state.
Universal quantum computation can
be built from a small subset of these types
of single and two-qubit gates, and a universal gate set
allows us to perform any type of quantum algorithm
on a gate model quantum computer.
