
There are a couple of different kinds of quantum computers.
The most general is a Universal Fault Tolerant Quantum
Computer.
The gate model algorithm that we discussed earlier runs
on this type of computer.
Building a Universal, Fault Tolerant Quantum Computer,
I think, is one of the greatest scientific and technological
endeavors today.
Such a machine, when we build it,
will have all the power that quantum has to offer.
A Universal Fault Tolerant Quantum Computer
is really a holy grail, in some sense,
as it means we'll be able to program,
implement, and reliably run complex large scale quantum
algorithms.
We use a small set of single and two qubit gates
to implement universal quantum computation.
In principle, this computer can run any type of algorithm.
quantum or classical.
But there are only certain algorithms
that are known to exhibit a quantum advantage.
Something that we'll refer to as quantum speed up.
One example is Shor's Factoring Algorithm.
Shor's algorithm is used to break public key cryptography.
For example, RSA encryption.
A scheme that's commonly used for secure communications.
The security of RSA encryption is based on the premise
that factoring a large integer number into two smaller
prime numbers is a very difficult computation
for a classical computer to perform.
Furthermore, the computational complexity
scales poorly with the length of the encryption key.
So for example, if you're dissatisfied
with your current level of security,
just double the length of your public key
and it will become exponentially harder for a classical computer
to break that encryption scheme.
In contrast, Shor's algorithm can perform the same tasks
with only a marginal increase in difficulty
as the length of the key has increased.
Other examples include Grover's algorithm
for searching an unsorted database,
or sampling solutions to linear equations.
For these types of algorithms, quantum speed up of some degree
exists over known classical algorithms
when run on a universal quantum computer.
The actual amount of speed up for these algorithms
is something we'll discuss later in the course.
The advantage of a Gate Model Quantum computer
is that it's universal.
In principle, it can run any algorithm.
Now, in practice of course, not all algorithms
are going to exhibit a quantum speedup, but many will.
The challenge lies in making a computer that
is both large enough and operates for long enough
to complete an algorithm and obtain the answer.
Even though the fundamental building blocks,
the qubits themselves, are prone to errors.
In a quantum computer, each operation
has a probability of being noisy, right?
That is of adding an error to the computation.
And we need a way to combat the buildup of all these errors
so that the output we get out of the algorithm,
or the computation, is actually reliable.
As we'll see later in the course,
such errors can be overcome by something called Quantum Error
Correction.
But it will require additional resources to implement it.
