Before diving into quantum computing,
it's worthwhile to go back and revisit
the history of classical electronic computing
in the last century.
And as we'll see, there are a few takeaways
from this history that are relevant
to the current and future development of quantum
computing.
The first three terminal triode vacuum tube
was invented by Lee de Forest in 1906.
Vacuum tubes, much like the transistors
that would later follow, are essentially
faucets for electricity, where the application
of a small voltage on one terminal
effectively opens a valve which allows
current to flow between the other two terminals.
As such, vacuum tubes were used primarily
as amplifiers for radio receivers,
but they could also be used as on/off switches
to implement logic gates.
And so it was about 40 years after that first invention,
we had the first large scale computers based on vacuum tubes,
such as the Electronic Numerical Integrator and Computer,
or ENIAC, developed at the University of Pennsylvania
in the 1940s.
Also around that time, in 1947, the first transistor
was invented at Bell Laboratories
and the first fully transistor based computer soon followed.
That computer, the Transistor Experimental Computer Number
Zero, or TX-0, was built at MIT and Lincoln Laboratory
in the mid 1950s, and it featured discrete transistors
and a magnetic core memory, quite different from
the computers we know and use today.
Shortly thereafter, in 1959, the first integrated circuits using
silicon were demonstrated, but still, it was a good 20 or 30
years before we had the types of integrated circuit chips
and memory chips that we now use in our computers
on a daily basis.
The first commercially available monolithic processor, the Intel
4004, appeared in 1971.
It was a 4-bit processor, featured 2100 transistors,
and clocked in at around 740 kilohertz.
Within a year or two, however, Intel came out with another
processor, the 8008, an 8-bit processor with nearly double
the number of transistors.
This doubling of the number of transistors approximately
every two years was exemplary of what
became known as Moore's law.
And by the 1990s, following Moore's law,
the number of transistors had increased into the millions.
Today we have computer chips, CPUs, TPUs,
GPUs with multiple cores and transistor counts
exceeding 100 billion.
Although performance increases had previously simply followed
from this Moore's law type scaling,
these straightforward improvements
have significantly waned over the past decade.
Nonetheless, with the development of high-K
dielectrics, low resistance interconnects,
multi-core processors, 3D integration, and the like,
we can expect continued improvements in the performance
of classical processors for years to come.
Now, in contrast to this 100-plus years of classical
computing development, quantum computing is much more recent.
In the early 1980s, Richard Feynman suggested that if we
want to simulate a quantum system,
a task that's very hard for a classical computer,
we should in fact use a quantum system to perform that
simulation.
Basically, he was suggesting we should build a quantum computer.
He also noted that it's a very interesting problem
because it's not so easy.
And he was right.
Over the next decade or so, researchers
thought about what kinds of algorithms
could potentially give a quantum advantage for real world
problems of significance and also how fragile quantum states
could ever be used to implement such an algorithm.
The answer started to come in the mid 1990s,
including two very important milestones in the history
of quantum computing.
The first was the discovery of Shor's algorithm, developed
by MIT Professor Peter Shor.
Shor's algorithm was not the first quantum algorithm
to show quantum advantage, but it
was the first that also addressed an important practical
problem, namely, the factorization of large numbers.
Now, that's an important problem because the difficulty
of factorization is a pillar for our present day encryption
schemes that protect our information.
Essentially, factoring large numbers
is a very challenging problem on a classical computer,
which is why it's used for public key encryption.
And Peter Shor showed that factorization
could be done efficiently on a quantum computer.
Also around that time, Peter Shor and his colleagues
Robert Calderbank and Andrew Steane
developed the first quantum error
correcting codes, which, once fully implemented,
will enable quantum computers to continue to operate robustly,
even in the presence of errors.
Since then, researchers have focused
on both the underlying physics as well as the hardware
that we can use to build quantum computers.
Starting at the single qubit level,
researchers have explored numerous qubit modalities,
from superconductors to trapped ions, semiconductors, and more.
Today, we have processors operating with a few hundred
to 1,000 qubits for gate model quantum computing,
and more than 5,000 qubits in quantum annealing machines.
There's also been a marked transition from prototype
demonstrations in the early 2000s to where we are today,
which is engineering larger and larger quantum systems.
We're even now seeing examples of cloud quantum
computers on the web.
So what does this all mean?
Well, I think there are a couple takeaways
from this brief historical discussion.
The first is that technology development takes time.
It took more than a century to get from the first triode vacuum
tubes to the computers that we have today.
And that development is not over.
It continues today.
Furthermore, there are many changes along the way.
The right approach to building a classical computer
changed many times over the years.
There was no single right answer.
The right technology in the 1940s was not the same as it was
in the 1980s, and that was also different than it is today.
Nonetheless, in hindsight, all of these steps
were crucial to the overall development.
Similarly, we can expect that, going forward,
quantum computing will also likely go through a technology
evolution.
The best qubit modalities today are not necessarily
the ones that will excel in the future.
However, the observation is that in the absence of effort,
we should not expect the right technology to simply appear
if we wait long enough.
Technology is developed.
It's not bestowed.
The road to future quantum computers,
whatever they may end up looking like,
is paved with the technologies we develop today.
Finally, we should not underestimate the crucial role
that commercialization played in the development
of classical computing technologies.
Transistors, from the very beginning,
had commercial applications that generated revenue
long before computers were commonly available, including
radio amplifiers, hearing aids, and the like.
And although governments played a key role
in seeding the development of transistor based computers
and are playing an equally crucial role in the development
of quantum computers today, it was commercial development
of transistors and computer chips
that ultimately enabled the virtuous cycle of development
that made possible the Moore's law like scaling that led
to the computers we use today.
And in fact, a major challenge for quantum computing
is to identify these kinds of commercially viable applications
for qubits and small scale quantum processors that
can kick start a similar virtuous development cycle, one
that will absolutely be needed if we're to realize large scale
quantum computers.
