
Another type of quantum computer is a quantum simulator,
a processor that simulates the behavior
of a physical system, a chemical reaction,
or a biological process.
Simulations can be implemented using
single- and two-qubit gates as on a universal quantum
computer, and we'll call these digital simulations.
Alternatively, the qubits themselves,
the way that they connect to one another,
and the strengths of those connections
can be designed to emulate a system's behavior.
We'll call this an analog simulator.
There are also examples of hybrid simulators
that use aspects of both digital and analog approaches.
Nature is quantum mechanical.
So with quantum computers, we get this ability
to take a step closer to being able to actually
computationally model aspects of physical systems.
So I think this is a pretty amazing
potential first application of quantum computers.
As the first business application,
with the knowledge of today, I would
say the simulation of molecules in materials
is the most likely, which, in turn, can
have a really broad impact in science and technology
and in society.
One example is the simulation of chemical reaction mechanisms.
It's estimated that somewhere between 1% and 2%
of worldwide energy production is used to produce ammonia
for agricultural fertilizer.
The key step is a process called nitrogen fixation.
In industry, nitrogen fixation is
performed using the Haber Bosch process, which
requires both high pressure and high temperature.
In contrast, there exist bacteria
which use an enzyme called molybdenum nitrogenase, which,
even at room temperature, can catalyze atmospheric nitrogen
into ammonia.
How do the bacteria do it?
Well, we don't really know precisely.
We do know the key component is an iron molybdenum cofactor,
a chemical compound that acts as a helper
molecule for the enzyme.
However, it's not known how the reaction works in detail.
Simulations with classical computers, of course,
exist but only provide approximate answers.
If we could actually study that process and understand it,
then we could potentially engineer a catalyst that
makes this reaction efficient.
Now to study this with classical computers,
this is lifetime of the universe time scale
to get a solution.
On the other hand, a quantum simulation
of the chemical reaction steps would
provide the reaction energies that are involved
in the nitrogen fixation.
This type of quantum chemistry simulation
has many applications.
For example, developing new pharmaceutical drugs
or tailoring a material to have unique properties.
For these types of simulations, it's
been shown that a quantum speedup can exist over known
classical algorithms.
