
[MUSIC PLAYING]

WILL OLIVER: We hear about quantum computers
nearly every day in the news and in the popular press.
It's said that quantum computers will
solve certain types of problems, ones
of tremendous importance to humankind,
and problems that today are practically
prohibitive, or maybe even impossible to solve
with current computers.
We hear about pharmaceuticals and drug discovery
gaining a better understanding of new materials
like high-temperature superconductors
and how they work, new methods for machine learning,
artificial intelligence, optimization problems,
financial services and technology.
Quantum computers will even challenge and change
the way we securely communicate information.
It certainly sounds like a fantastic and exciting future,
which leads us to a few fundamental questions.
What exactly is a quantum computer and what's it good for?
More importantly, when will we have one?
DANNA ROSENBERG: Quantum computers
are not just smaller, faster versions of classical computers.
They're fundamentally different.
BO EWALD: We're in the digital computer world.
A bit, which is one basic element of information,
is a 0 or a 1, nothing else.
DANNA ROSENBERG: In a quantum computer,
you can have a quantum bit, or qubit, that's
in a superposition of 0 and 1.
DAVID KIM: We can design it.
We can actually control it.
We're actually engineering and manipulating quantum mechanics.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
MORTEN KJAEGAARD: So when we'll have a quantum computer
is a very interesting and nuanced question.
And the answer will, therefore, be kind of finicky.
JEREMY SAGE: We've been saying quantum computers are
10 years away.
But we've been saying that for decades.
DANNA ROSENBERG: Depending on your definition,
we already have quantum computers.
They're just small.
JEREMY SAGE: Within my lifetime, I believe,
and I won't say how old I am.
DARIO GIL: This is not decades away, or 100 years away.
That quantum age has now come.
WILL OLIVER: Quantum computers aren't simply faster,
smaller versions of the conventional computers
we have today.
Nor are they another incremental step
in the evolution of Moore's law.
Rather, quantum computers represent
a new, fundamentally different computing paradigm,
one that carries tremendous advantage for certain types
of problems of importance.
DENNY DAHL: Quantum computing could really
transform industries where there are significant optimization
problems.
You've got a lot of discrete, or binary decisions
to make to figure out, do you do this first or that first?
This is where we shine.
SERGIO BOXIO: Another way to understand
the difference between classical and quantum computers
is if you look at quantum systems of quantum simulation.
HARTMUT NEVEN: The quantum processor
is a suitable tool for modeling other quantum systems.
JONILYN YODER: Biomolecule systems, tons of systems
that we use, materials systems work
based on those quantum mechanical properties.
DAVID KIM: You kind of need a quantum machine in order
to simulate quantum effects.
JOHN CHIAVERINI: When we can manipulate individual molecules
and understand what's going on in those molecules, how they
bond, then we'll be able to have a really good handle
on generating new things, novel materials
that might be very useful.
WILL OLIVER: Still, we're just at the very beginning of quantum
computing development, assembling and testing
the first prototype processors.
It's a bit like being in the 1950s at the dawn
of transistor-based computing.
And just as integrated circuits led to an information processing
revolution last century, driving economic growth
and productivity, many people today
believe that quantum computing will have a similar impact
this century.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
KRYSTA SVORE: Quantum computing and quantum algorithms
present fundamentally new programming and algorithm design
paradigms.
How do we fundamentally unlock new ideas in computing?
JONILYN YODER: We're still learning
a lot about how to improve the individual components,
as well as connect them together.
DAVID KIM: That's part of the fun.
That's why I'm there to see what can we
do to enable that increased complexity and functionality
of these qubits.
DANNA ROSENBERG: We're really here at the very beginning,
and I just find that tremendously exciting.
WILL OLIVER: Our goal here is to separate the promise
from the hype to help leaders in business, government,
and technology understand the basics of how a quantum computer
works and its applications.
We'll begin by focusing on those basics,
from both a technical standpoint and a business standpoint.
First off, what is a quantum computer,
and how are quantum computers different
than conventional computers?
What types of problems are hard for classical computers,
but can be efficiently solved on a quantum computer?
And what technology platforms are
being used to realize a quantum computer,
and how do they compare with one another?
When can we expect a quantum computer,
and what might it look like?
Also, what threat does quantum computing
pose for information security?
How will post-quantum crypto mitigate that threat?
And what do we need to do now to get ready?
In answering these questions, we'll
be laying the groundwork to help you
and your organizations become quantum-aware,
understanding how quantum may impact your business
and your bottom line in the future,
and getting started on developing strategies
today that will help you and your organizations prepare for
and be ready for that future.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
