
Quantum parallelism and quantum interference
are what make a quantum computer different
than a classical computer.
But what are these quantum effects?
And how do they work in a quantum computer?
To gain some insight, we'll consider
an example of a small quantum computer with three qubits.
Here we have three atoms.
Each of which has an electron with a spin.
And each of these spins can either
be pointed up, which we'll call spin-up, or pointed down,
which we'll call spin-down.
We'll use these three electron spins as our qubits.
And there are eight different spin combinations
that we can have, from all three pointed up,
to all three pointed down.
We place these qubits in a single quantum superposition
state, comprising all eight of these spin configurations.
And it takes eight complex numbers, C1 through C8,
to specify the weighting of each of these components.
The superposition state can then be represented
as a state register with all eight spin
configurations and their respective coefficients.
Let's now imagine that we want to perform an operation that
flips the spin of Atom 1.
We can do this by applying an electromagnetic pulse
with the right strength and the right duration, such
that it rotates the spin of Atom 1 by 180 degrees.
This is called a pi pulse.
And it acts to flip the spin.
Spin-up rotates to spin-down, and spin-down rotates
to spin-up.

So when we flip the spin in Atom 1,
it acts to flip the spin on each of the spins
in the configurations that make up the superposition state.
For example, the coefficients C1 through C4,
originally associated with spin-up in Atom 1,
are now associated with spin-down.
And similarly, the coefficients C5 through C8,
originally associated with spin-down,
are now associated with spin-up.
This happens simultaneously across all
of the spin configurations that make up the quantum
superposition state, even though we're
performing only a single operation on a single qubit.
And this is an example of quantum parallelism.
Let's now take a look at quantum interference
between these states.
In this case, we'll address Atom 3.
And we'll consider a type of pulse called a pi over 2 pulse.
What a pi over 2 pulse does is it takes a spin-up
and rotates it to a superposition state of
up plus down.
Now, if you've taken a quantum mechanics class before,
you probably remember that there is a normalization factor
1 over square root of 2 that sits in front.
This maintains the length of the vector on the bloch sphere.
But we'll omit those factors here
as they're not important for this discussion.
So a pi over 2 pulse rotates a spin-up to a superposition of
up plus down.
We can visualize that on the bloch sphere.
The spin-up is pointed at the North Pole.
And we rotate it pi over 2, or 90 degrees, down
to the equator.
We'll associate the direction of the vector
that it's now pointing with a plus sign.
And so the superposition state is up plus down.
In the state space, for the moment,
let's just look at coefficient C5.
C5 is originally associated with a spin-up on Atom 3.
After the pi over 2 rotation, it is now
associated with both a spin-up and a spin-down.
Next, let's look at what happens to spin-down.
A pi over 2 pulse will rotate a spin-down
pointed at the South Pole up to the equator,
but now in the opposite direction.
We'll associate this new direction with a minus sign.
And so the resulting superposition state
is up minus down.
In the state space, the coefficient C6,
originally associated with a spin-down in Atom 3,
is now associated with both up and down, but with a minus sign
for the spin-down.
So we find plus 6 for spin-up, and minus 6 for spin-down.
So what does it all mean?
Well, if C5 equals C6, for example,
then C5 minus C6 is zero.
And there's no longer any weighting
to the up-up-down state.
And this is an example of destructive quantum
interference.
At the same time, there's constructive quantum
interference that increases the weighting
of the state with C5 plus C6.
And this is also an example of quantum parallelism,
because this quantum interference process also
happens simultaneously to all the other states
in the register.
So quantum parallelism and quantum interference
form the foundation for how a quantum computer processes
information.
As we just saw, with even a single gate
operation, quantum parallelism and quantum interference
allow us to simultaneously manipulate and change
the values of the many weighting coefficients that
comprise a superposition state.
And at a fundamental level, this is
how we can efficiently implement quantum algorithms on a quantum
computer.
