
So how is a quantum computer different?
We can begin to answer that question by comparing it
with a classical computer.
Classical computers are the computing devices
that, of course, we use everyday at work and at home,
and they process information using
transistors, each of which can store one bit of information.
We'll call this a classical bit.
A classical bit is binary.
It can take on one of two states.
It can either be in state 0, let's say the absence
of a voltage on the transistor gate,
or it can be in state 1, the presence
of a voltage on that gate.
These are discrete, robust states,
and when we measure the state of that transistor,
we'll see either a 0 or a 1, depending
on where that bit was set.
We can contrast that with a quantum computer which
is built from logical elements called qubits, which
is short for quantum bits.
A qubit is binary in the sense that it's
realized using a quantum coherent two-state system,
and so of course, it can be set in state 0 or state 1,
but because it's quantum mechanical,
it can do much more.
A qubit can also be at a quantum superposition state.
It's a single state, but it carries aspects of both state 0
and state 1 simultaneously, and this
is a manifestly quantum mechanical effect.
We can represent a qubit state on what's
called a Bloch Sphere, which for the purposes
of this discussion, we can think of as the planet Earth, where
state 0 is at the North Pole and state 1 is at the South Pole.
In this representation, a classical bit
can be either at the North Pole or at the South Pole,
but that's it.
In contrast, a qubit can exist anywhere on its surface.
Now, of course, a qubit can also be at the North
Pole or the South Pole.
That's fine, but when it's anywhere else,
the qubit is in a superposition state, again, a single state
that takes on aspects of state 0 and state 1 simultaneously,
as shown in the notation here.

Superposition states result in probabilistic measurements,
meaning that if we had say an equal superposition of 0 and 1,
and we measure the qubit, we have a 50/50
chance of measuring in state 0 and a 50/50
chance of getting state 1.
If we identically prepare that same state
and measure it, and do that over and over again,
half of the time we'll get to 0 and half of the time we'll
get to 1.
As a result, quantum computers rely on encoding information
in fundamentally different ways than classical computers.
So on a classical computer N classical bits
represent a single N-bit state.
For example, if N equals 3, we have 3 classical bits,
and they can represent the state 000 or 001,
all the way up to 111.
There are eight different combinations,
but the three classical bits can represent only one of them
at a time.

And so when we want to process information
on a classical computer, we pick one
of those states as the input, we process the information,
and we get a result as an output.
But if we also want to process information
using a different input state, we basically have two choices.
We can either process in parallel,
using additional copies of the hardware,
or with additional time, we can process sequentially
on the same piece of hardware.
This is classical parallelism, and in both cases,
we needed additional resources, either more hardware
or more time.
The qubits in a quantum computer, on the other hand,
can be set into a single superposition state that
simultaneously carries aspects of all of these 2
to the N components.
So for example, with three qubits,
a quantum computer can represent aspects
of all eight different components in a single quantum
superposition state, and so as a consequence,
we have a quantum version of parallelism,
and importantly, we also have quantum interference
between those constituent components.
Quantum parallelism and quantum interference
are what make a quantum computer different,
and in the next section, we'll give
examples of how they work in a quantum processor.
