
We're all familiar with the laptop computers,
desktop computers, even servers in the cloud
that we interact with on a daily basis.
In this course we'll refer to these as classical computers
to contrast them with the quantum computers
we'll be discussing in detail later in the course.
Classical computers use transistor-based integrated
circuits-- computer chips--
to process information and solve problems, whether for
implementing a financial transaction,
simulating a weather pattern, developing a CAD design,
or even just drafting an email to a colleague.
But it's important to remember that there
are many alternative ways in which one
can process information.
So before we get started, let's hear
from Professor Ike Chuang about what constitutes a computer
and computation.
There are many models of classical computation,
and what I'd like to do is to illustrate
a wide variety of models, some of which
you might find unexpected.
One model is actually mechanical.
So for example, the thermostats on the walls, at least at MIT,
are driven by pneumatic pressure,
and they actuate a little switch.
So they're a little kind of computer
that controls temperature, but it's an analog computer.
So mechanical computers do not need to be digital.
They can come in all kinds of shapes and forms.
And the one that's perhaps the most famous in history
is Babbage's difference engine.
We can have electrical circuits, which
are ways of building a universal classical computer.
We can also have optical computers
that are made out of information carriers that
are photons and not electrons.
Biological.
In many ways you and I are walking, talking computers.
And this idea of biology and biological systems as computers
is currently going through a renaissance because
of the notions of neural networks and deep learning
and these kinds of networks of neurons
that act as computation.
I also want to make a distinction
between these models and some conceptual models.
These are models by which you might realize computation,
and these are the conceptual models which
you might want to realize, one of them
which is the Turing machine.
It is a machine that has a head and a tape
and the tape has slots on it which may have ones and zeros.
And it is something which has an extent to left and right
which goes off, in principle, to infinity.
And the tape is a kind of memory.
And the thing which is ostensibly
doing the computation is a head that can read and write
to this tape, but the only thing inside this head
is a finite state machine.
So there are different states and there
are transitions between the states which happen
depending on what is read at what
time and the previous state that it used to exist in.
And Turing machines like this come in many different flavors.
There are probabilistic Turing machines,
and there are universal Turing machines.
So given a certain kind of structure of a finite state
machine here, you find that this Turing machine, then,
is capable of simulating any other Turing machine.
Here's another model-- cellular automata.
And here, the model of computation
is a world which is a grid in two dimensions-- in n
dimensions-- where the point is that you have
some kind of state in a local cell of this grid,
and it undergoes transitions based
on the state of its neighbors.
And you may have a local Cartesian neighborhood.
You may have super Cartesian, but depending
on what you're surrounded by you change your state.
You change yourself to becoming empty or filled
or a different color and so forth.
And these rules of patterns and pattern changes
can give rise to computation.
There's the Von Neumann architecture.
It is, again, a conceptual model of computation.
And here the idea is to split memory from something
which does arithmetic.
So we have an arithmetic logic unit,
for example, maybe some registers.
Memory reads out data and feeds it into this ALU.
Then the ALU feeds data back into the memory,
and this is, by and large, the model that's
used by all processors today, including
the ones on all of your phones.
There are DNA-based computation.
This is the idea that maybe you have strands of bases--
AGCT-- and then, A and T associate each other,
and this is called ligation.
And then G and C also ligate together.
And, therefore, when you have two different strands of DNA,
they will pattern match other strands in the right locations
to produce base-pair ligations.
And this has been shown to allow a kind of computation
using polymerase chain reaction tools.
So that if you have a beaker, for example, with just one
DNA strand, with PCR you can amplify
the number of DNA strands there so you
can detect the existence of a certain sequence of DNA.
And so it's really neat that you can
think of using such tools to do computation.
And I want you to be open to such kinds of models
of computation, especially today because we are now
starting to reconsider what it means to do computation.
In many ways we are at the end of the road of silicon today.
We cannot rely on Moore's Law much longer to provide
an increasing scaling that's exponential of capability
and size and power and weight to build our computers.
We need to look at different physical mechanisms
to build computation.
And that's why all of these different approaches,
where you represent information in different ways,
is so appealing to think about because,
maybe, the next thing beyond silicon
could be something different-- very different--
that utilizes these ideas.
And maybe what we might discover is
that it's already happening all around us, or within us,
if we only know how to think about it in the right way.
So although this class is about quantum computation,
ostensibly, what I want you to think about
is how we're also thinking about a broader question of what
is the physics of computation?
How do you think of physical mechanisms
as doing computation?
And how do you think you might be
able to exploit physical mechanisms
and biological mechanisms that exist
to realize the computations that you want to achieve?
