
In 1998, after we had implemented the first two qubit
algorithms on the chloroform molecule
and using NMR, Ike Chuang, who supervised the research,
gave me a great challenge--
to factor the number 15 within the time span of my PhD
at Stanford.
At that time, Ike was transitioning
from Los Alamos National Laboratory to the IBM Almaden
Research Center outside San Jose.
And I was finishing the first year of my PhD at Stanford.
At that time, I helped Ike set up his new lab
at Almaden, some 30 minutes away from Stanford.
I didn't know what it would take to factor the number 15,
but it did seem like a great challenge.
And certainly, it was clear that there was an enormous interest
in Shor's Algorithm and that it was
a major driver for our field.
So I thought it would be very awesome to demonstrate Shor's
Algorithm experimentally.
So what would it take to run Shor's Algorithm
experimentally?
The simplest instance of quantum factoring
is to factor the number 15, to pull
it apart into 3 times 5.
But how many qubits does that take, and how many operations?
We got great insight from a pedagogical article
by Dave Beckman from the Preskill group at Caltech.
In particular, he analyzed the steps
for factoring the number 15.
Shor's Algorithm in general consists
of two parts, a classical part and
the quantum mechanical part.
The quantum part that we run on our quantum computer
is designed to find the period of a function, specifically
the function a to the power x modulo N, that
is to say the remainder after division of a to the x by N.
N here is the number we're trying to factor.
a is a number that can be anything
as long as it is co-prime with N,
and x is the argument of the function.
For period finding on a quantum computer,
we divide the number of qubits into two registers.
One register needs to be large enough
that it can store the number N.
For 15, we need four bits, so four qubits
are needed for that register.
The other register in principle needs
to be twice as large or eight qubits,
bringing the total to 12 qubits to factor the number 15.
The algorithm consists of, first, a Hadamard operation
that prepares an equal superposition of all the states
of the first register then a function call of the function
a to the x modulo N where x are the states
of the first register.
And the result is mapped into the state
of the second register.
And the third step is the Quantum Fourier Transform
applied to the first register.
At the end of the computation, we
read out this first register.
Now, if you begin to analyze how to implement
this complex function a to the x modulo N,
you realize that it can be broken apart
into multiple simpler operations, where each of them
is a operation controlled by just one bit out of all
the bits of the first register.
And then you find for the number 15 that we're lucky.
Only two of the control qubits actually
play a role in factoring 15.
And in some cases, some choices of a, even just one
of the control qubits plays a role.
So that actually allows us to eliminate many qubits
of the first register.
In principle, you could eliminate all of them
except two.
Now, we decided that for a meaningful Quantum Fourier
Transform, we would like to have not just two qubits,
but at least three qubits.
With two qubits the Quantum Fourier Transform
comes down to a single two qubit gate.
And we thought that was too trivial.
So in the end, we went with an experiment
with a total of seven qubits to factor the number 15.
So in NMR, the qubits are represented
by the nuclear spins in the molecule,
the spins of the atomic nuclei in a molecule.
For a successful molecule for NMR qubit experiments,
the molecule needs to have a rather unusual properties.
We need what we call large chemical shifts, that
is to say, large separations in frequency between all the
spins that we want to involve in the computation
for selective addressing of the qubits.
And we want a coupling network that
allows sufficient pairs of qubit, pairs of
spins, to be coupled to each other
so that all the required two qubit gates can be implemented
on the molecule.
So [INAUDIBLE],, a staff member at IBM Almaden,
did an extensive search looking through fast tables
and documents with tabulated NMR properties of known molecules.
And after spending days and weeks in this process,
he came to the conclusion that none of the tabulated molecules
were good enough for the experiment
that we were attempting.
However, there was one that came close.
It consisted of a backbone of four carbon atoms.
And surrounding it there were five fluorine atoms
that all could serve as a spin one-half and provide a qubit.
And in addition, there was an iron complex.
The iron complex created asymmetry in the molecule
so that the resonance frequencies of the five
fluorine atoms would be separated.
To go from five fluorine spins to seven,
what we needed to do was to isotopically label
two of the carbon spins so that they became carbon-13
and also acquired a spin one-half.
Synthesizing this molecule was a real tour de force.
Greg Breyta, IBM staff member who
usually worked on chemical synthesis
in the Resist program, spent over one year trying
to synthesize this molecule.
And at any point in time in this multi-step synthesis,
we didn't know if this next step was going to be successful.
But finally, after more than a year, actually just in time
when I was ready to try the experiment,
he delivered the molecule.
So the next challenge was to develop the control techniques
to take the seven spins through the steps of Shor's Algorithm,
basically to make them do the spin dance
with a great degree of control.
Here we could benefit from decades of technology
development in NMR spectroscopy,
where people were interested in revealing
the structure of molecules they were synthesizing.
And we got great advice from experienced NMR spectroscopist
at IBM, Mark Sherwood.
In the years that followed in '99 and 2000,
we did experiments with first two, then three,
and five spins to learn how to control the time evolution
of increasing numbers of spins.
They were all coupled together.
But the factoring experiment, it
became clear it was beyond anything that anyone had ever
done in terms of controlling many coupled quantum spins.
It required more than 300 radio frequency pulses,
specially tailored in amplitude and phase
to allow selective addressing of each of the seven spins.
In addition, we had to account for unintended phase shifts that
occurred on any of the qubits when we were driving
any other of the qubits.
In addition to that, since we were competing
against the decoherence timescale,
we had to apply simultaneous rotations
where cross-talk effects were actually even more severe.
And we had to account for those as well.
And then finally, in NMR in these molecules,
the couplings are always on.
So we had to use some rather sophisticated
so-called decoupling sequences that effectively remove
the effect of all the couplings except the one coupling
that we needed to run a two qubit gate between two spins.
So, together with Matthias Stephan, fellow PhD student
at Stanford who started one year after me,
we went out to try and control the seven spins,
starting in September of 2000.
And throughout that fall and the winter of 2001,
we made a lot of progress.
We used a variant NMR four channel spectrometer
to control the seven spins.
And after some time, we were far enough
that the output spectra actually revealed
us the information of the period of a to the x modulo 15.
And from that, we could say that we had factored 15.
At the same time, we were disappointed because the output
spectra, even though they did give us the right information,
they didn't look like what we ideally expected.
And even though we added more and more sophistication
in our control techniques, it seemed
like we were hitting a wall.
At some point, I set out to write a model
to capture the main effects of decoherence in a simple way.
And there it was, beautifully reproducing
the experimental spectra, the simulated spectra
accounting for decoherence.
This was interesting because in our four years of experience
programming NMR sequences and operating on molecules,
this was the first time that decoherence
had become our limiter.
