
What is the algorithm in detail?
So suppose we have a bound on r--
maybe I should call it r-max--
and choose a power of 2 bigger than 2 r-max.
And well, I will write down the algorithm.
We start with plus to the 2l 0.
That's here.
Next, we take the compute f with x.
And you know, whatever ends in the first register,
we compute that in the second register.
But this is just sum i equals 0 to 2 to the 2l.
i, where i is just the binary representation of the number.
And we need to divide by 2 to the l because we
want this to be a unit vector.
So we compute f.
So this becomes sum to the 2l i f of i.
i equals 0 to 2 to the 2l.
Do the quantum Fourier transform.
So that's 1 over to 2 to the 2l summation.
You know, i is a really bad letter
to use because it's also the square root of minus 1.
So let's use x.
So the quantum Fourier transform takes
x to, let's call it, z f of x.
z equals 0 to 2 to the 2l minus 1. e to the 2 pi i xz
over 2 to the 2l.
So we've taken x and taken the Fourier transform of it,
and that gives us this.

Now,
What happens if we measure f of x?
Well, we're going to get some value for f of x.
And I'm going to leave that out the normalization
constant for the time being because figuring out
exactly what's going on with a normalization
constant is possible, but it's a lot of tedious algebra.
And I'll come back to it later.
So without a normalized, z equals 0 through 2 to the 2l.
Let x0 be the smallest x giving f of x.

So this is going to be z of the form x0 plus y times pi.
Because when you measure f of x, we only get z--
no, not z.

When we measure f of x, we only get
x equals x0 plus yr f of x0 z e to the 2 minus 2 pi i x--
well, xz, but x is of the form x0 plus yrz over 2 to the 2l.
So what did we do?
We measured f of x here.
And we're just looking at the ones which give us f of x0.
And we know all of these x's are the form x0 plus yr.
And the phase factor doesn't change and z doesn't change.
So now we have the sum.
And we have to figure out how big it is.

Well, we can write sum z equals 0 through 2 to the 2l.
Sum y equals 0 through 2 to the 2l over r, plus or minus 1
here, but that doesn't matter.
f of x0 z e to the 2 pi i x0 plus yrz over 2 to the 2l.

And what is this?
This is a geometric sum.
