JOHN SMOLIN: Peter Shor's 1994 polynomial time quantum
factoring algorithm is what really started the quantum
computing revolution.
Using it, it was discovered at IBM Research in 2001,
that 15 equals 3 times 5 using seven NMR qubits.
Then it was discovered again in 2007
using a different technology, photonics, with just four
qubits, and in 2009 using five, finally, in 2012,
using only three superconducting qubits.
Also, 21 was factored using a photonic qubit and qutrit, which
is a three-level system.
I've plotted these results versus time,
and you may notice something strange.
The number of qubits is going down.
And one can extrapolate that 15 will be factored
without any qubits at all.
So my collaborators and I started to wonder just
what's going on here.
How many qubits do you really need to factor a number anyway?
First, a quick review of Shor's algorithm.
The core of the algorithm is as follows.
To factor a number N, you first pick a base, a,
which is some integer.
Then you find the period, r, of a to the power
x modulo N. This period finding is the only quantum
part of the algorithm.
If you find that r is odd, or that a to the r over 2
is minus 1 mod N, you try again.
Otherwise, the greatest common divisor
of a to the r over 2 plus or minus 1 and N is a factor.
Euclid's algorithm, which is rather old technology, circa 300
BCE, is efficient for finding the GCD.
The quantum period-finding step requires a register big enough
to hold N and one more bit, which
is used to pull out bits of the quantum Fourier
transform using a technique known as qubit recycling.
So to factor n we need log n plus 1 qubits.
For 15, this works out to five bits as the minimum,
and even more if qubit recycling isn't used.
So how did people factor 15 with so few qubits?
It turns out that even the original 2001 experiment
with seven qubits used an additional trick called,
in an abuse of the term, compiling.
What was noticed was that for some bases a,
the period r is small.
Then the quantum register used to find the period only
needs to be big enough to hold r instead
of N. Can we always find a base which results in a small r?
It turns out the answer is yes.
We employ a much more modern result
than Euclid's algorithm, the Chinese remainder
theorem from 400 CE.
It says that given two primes, p and q,
then a squared is 1 mod pq if and only if a squared is
1 mod p and also mod q.
If we then choose a equals plus or minus p pq plus or minus
q qp, where pq is the inverse of p mod q
and qp is the inverse of q mod p, then by construction,
a squared equals 1 mod p and mod q.
Furthermore, we can find pq and qp efficiently using what else?
Euclid's algorithm.
In other words, for any N equals p times q,
we have an efficient algorithm for finding
a base a with a squared equals 1 mod N, or period r equals 2.
So we can now implement Shor's algorithm
using exactly two qubits and factor an arbitrary
N. The circuit looks like this.
We can further simplify if we notice that the bottom qubit is
never measured and realize that the circuit
makes a maximally entangled state
and measures just one of the qubits.
So all it does is produce random bits.
We actually implemented this using the device shown.
Here is the back of the device with a quarter next to it
for scale.
We factored 15 RSA-768, which I believe is the largest number
ever factored on classical computers,
and a 20,000-digit number of our own creation called N20,000.
Now obviously, this devolved somewhere into nonsense.
The trick, the cheating part, is that finding a base
with a small period is easy only if we already
know the factors p and q.
Naturally, factoring is easy, provided
only that you know the factors.
As I'm recording this, it is the 100th birthday of Richard
Feynman.
So let me leave you with this quote from his commencement
address to the 1974 class at Caltech.
The first principle is that you must not fool yourself,
and you are the easiest person to fool.
After you've not fooled yourself,
it's easy not to fool other scientists.
