
In this section, we'll take a look at modern cryptography
schemes and their use in information security today.
Every day we generate, accumulate, and communicate
tremendous amounts of data.
Everything from our personal emails,
financial transactions, and medical records,
to a corporation's intellectual property,
business strategy, and online sales,
to the daily operation and functioning of our government
and military organizations.
In each of these cases we expect, even require,
that our information is stored and communicated securely such
that it's available to ourselves and to our intended recipients,
but to nobody else.
And in general, information is protected
through the use of encryption.
Encryption takes raw data, for example, a message,
often referred to as plain text, and translates it
or encodes it into an unrecognizable message called
a cyphertext.
It does this by using an algorithm called a cypher.
A cypher takes as inputs the plaintext being encoded
and a key, typically a numerical bit string in today's
cryptography schemes.
The cypher then combines them into an unreadable cyphertext
through a prescribed algorithmic protocol based
on mathematical operations.
Similarly, a decryption key is used
with a corresponding decryption protocol
to reconstruct the plaintext message.
The most common cryptography schemes historically
are called symmetric key cryptography
in which the encryption and decryption keys are the same
or can be trivially related to one another.
Examples include the older data encryption standard, DES,
and the more modern advanced encryption standard, AES.
The one-time pad that we discussed in course one
in the context of quantum key distribution
is another example of a symmetric key cryptography
scheme.
Since symmetric keys are used to both encrypt
and decrypt a message, they must remain private.
This isn't a serious issue on, say,
a personal computer where we want to encrypt the hard drive
and so the keys are stored locally.
However, it raises a challenge when communicating information.
When two parties want to communicate securely,
they either need to meet in advance to secretly share
the symmetric keys--
not a very practical option--
or they need to establish private channels
to securely distribute the key.
Now in the future, efficient quantum key distribution
protocols may provide a quantum enhanced level of security
when transmitting a secret symmetric key.
But today, secure communication links
are generally established through the use
of public key cryptography based on asymmetric keys.
Public key cryptography was developed in the 1970s
by several groups.
Whitfield Diffie and Martin Hellman
published the first public key cryptography
scheme, the Diffie-Hellman key exchange protocol, in 1976.
And later in 1978, the RSA algorithm
was published by Ronald Rivest, Adi Shamir, and Len Adleman.
In fact, researchers at the British General Communications
Headquarters, GCHQ, had developed
similar public key cryptography schemes in the early 1970s,
but only declassified those achievements in 1997.
Public key cryptography is based on asymmetric keys, that
is, a public key is used for encryption
and a separate independent, private key
is used for decryption.
The keys are necessarily related to one another mathematically
and the information security relies
on it being computationally impractical to determine
the private key given the public key.
This is generally possible through the use
of one-way mathematical functions.
For example, RSA cryptography is based on the idea
that it's mathematically easy for a computer
to multiply two large prime numbers, p and q,
and obtain their product, N. But it's
a very hard problem for a computer to do the inverse,
that is, factor that number, N, into its constituent prime
factors, p and q.
So with one-way mathematical functions, ease of use
is based on the mathematical simplicity
in the forward direction and security
is based on mathematical complexity
in the inverse direction.
To get an idea for how this works,
consider the following cartoon.
Bob wants to communicate a message securely to Alice
without that message being read by an eavesdropper, Eve.
To do this, Bob requests a public encryption key
from Alice.
Alice then sends a public encryption key,
but retains her private decryption key.
We'll represent this by keys with the letter
E for encryption, D for decryption,
and a notional open lock.
During transmission on a public channel,
in principle, Eve obtains the open lock and the encryption
key.
When Bob receives them, he encrypts his plaintext message
using the encryption key, creating cyphertext,
and effectively locks the padlock.
Bob then sends the cyphertext back
to Alice on a public channel.
Although Eve can obtain the cyphertext in principle,
she can't unlock the padlock since she only
has the public encryption key.
The security here is based on it being very hard for Eve
to figure out the decryption key based on what
she has in her possession.
Alice, on the other hand, is able to trivially unlock
the padlock using her decryption key,
thereby converting the cyphertext to plaintext
and reading the message.
This type of public key encryption scheme
is used ubiquitously today for secure communication.
In many cases, it's used to establish a private channel
that provides authentication and enables symmetric keys to be
exchanged securely.
This is because the public key approach based
on asymmetric keys is generally slower to implement
than symmetric schemes.
Public key encryption is a foundation
for our information security today.
And in the next section, we'll take a more detailed look
at one specific example, RSA cryptography, and how it works.
