
So let's reflect on what made this experiment successful.
The first is that the coherence times,
the t2’s in this specially designed molecule
were extremely long-- all in excess of 1 second.
We have to compare, of course, the coherence time
to the time scale of the operations that
for a single qubit-shaped pulses here varied
between 0.2 and 2 milliseconds.
And we also have to compare to the value of the coupling
strings between the spins in the molecule.
They varied from about a hertz, which was too low to be usable,
to about 200 hertz.
In total, the longest sequences we
had to run to implement Shor’s Algorithm
lasted about 700 milliseconds.
The second success factor is that in these experiments
we used liquid state NMR based on ensembles
of many copies of a molecule--
making the detection trivially easy,
almost, compared to the great challenge
of trying to work with individual
spins as is done today.
Furthermore, the liquid state NMR Hamiltonian
is actually relatively transparent and simple.
All the terms in the Hamiltonian commute with each other.
Single qubit terms have to form omega times sigma z.
And the two qubit interactions have
to form J times sigma z on one qubit and sigma z
on another qubit.
Scaling this approach, however, is hard.
First, I've already commented on the difficulty
in finding a suitable molecule with seven spins.
And finding molecules with larger numbers of qubits,
with larger numbers of suitable spins,
to solve more complex problems quickly gets
extremely difficult. But there is
a more fundamental and severe limitation to the liquid state
NMR approach and it is that even though we
work in large magnetic fields, the fact that we
use liquid states pushes us to work at relatively
large temperatures.
In fact, we operated at room temperature.
And nuclear spins in a magnetic field at room temperature
are in a highly mixed state, that
is to say the probability for a spin
to start off in the up state or the down state are almost
equal.
We used techniques developed in our community
to prepare so-called effectively pure states.
These are states that produce a signal that
is proportional to that of a pure state,
but the cost of this technique is
that the signal is halved for every qubit that we add.
And so this obviously induces exponential cost
that offsets any exponential gain
that we hope to get from the quantum algorithms.
The NMR experiments, and in particular the short
experiment, had really been great fun.
And I think we learned a great deal from it that also benefit
and still benefits, today, the community.
But certainly I wanted to move to technology
where the potential for scaling was better.
I decided to move from nuclear spins to electron spins
and from molecules to artificial molecules.
The artificial molecules we make use of
are built from Silicon quantum dots
in which we can find individual electrons
and use their spins as qubits.
Similar to the NMR molecules, these electron spins in
silicon offer really long coherence times,
but the devices are much more scalable
and the control, in the end, can take us much further.
Matthias Stephan, instead, made
a choice to work on superconducting qubits and he
was one of the early members of the IBM team working
on superconducting qubits, a very large and successful
program today.
Ike Chuang finally, decided
to move to trapped ions.
He set up a lab at MIT and in collaboration
with the group of Reiner Blatt Some years later,
they redid the factoring experiments--
a beautiful experiment implementing the factoring
of 15 on trapped ions.
As for the silicon spins that I work on myself,
we set the state of the art earlier this year
in implementing for the first time, in this type of system,
again, a two qubit algorithm.
For me this brought back great memories from '98.
But different from the NMR approach and these early
memories, my expectation is that with our group at QuTech
in Delft and in close collaboration with Intel,
with the silicon spin qubits, we can go all the way--
much beyond factoring 15.
