Welcome to course two in our continuing program
on the applications of quantum computing.
In course 1 we introduced quantum computing, and how
it works at an intuitive level.
And the material presented in course 1
will serve as a foundation for the remainder of the program.
We talked through how a quantum computer
is different than a classical computer.
Introducing important concepts such as quantum parallelism,
and quantum interference, manifestly quantum mechanical
effects, that enable quantum computers
to process information efficiently.
We learned about universal quantum computers, quantum
emulators, quantum simulators, and quantum annealers,
and the types of problems they can address.
We discussed what makes a good qubit, the DiVincenzo Criteria,
and compared several of the leading qubit modalities today,
including superconducting qubits and trapped ions.
We introduced the Bloch sphere, and Dirac notation.
And we learned how to control qubits using single qubit
and two qubit gate.
We found that qubits are susceptible to noise,
and they lose their quantum information
over time, that is they decohere, by processes
such as energy relaxation and dephasing.
Coherence time and gate speed are
both important characteristics of qubits.
It's not solely a long coherence time that's important,
but rather, the number of gates one
can perform, before quantum information is lost.
In fact, what matters most, is the gate fidelity.
And we discussed how to measure it using process tomography
and randomized benchmarking.
We then talked about the promise of quantum computing, quantum
speed-up, and methods for developing new algorithms.
Similarly, we talked about the promise of quantum
communication, quantum cryptography,
and distributed entanglement.
Finally, in week four, we looked at the circuit model
for classical and quantum computation--
initialize, compute, and measure, as well as
the software stack required to implement such a circuit.
We then walked through the Deutsche-Jozsa algorithm, how
it works, and then the lab practicum you implemented it
on the IBM quantum experience.
And so with that, let me welcome you again to course
two, quantum computing algorithms for cybersecurity,
chemistry, and optimization.
Course two builds on the foundation you just
studied, and uses it to probe more deeply,
the applications of quantum computing
and quantum cryptography.
We'll take a look at algorithms for cybersecurity, chemistry,
and optimization.
We won't worry about practical issues such as noise.
Rather, we want to understand how these algorithms work,
and their applications realized.
We'll begin by looking at how quantum can be used
to break public key encryption.
We've seen in course one, and we'll go into more detail
now, that Shor's algorithm can efficiently
defeat certain important encryption protocols,
for example RSA encryption.
Those that serve as the basis for our information security
today.
In week one we'll look at modern cryptography schemes based
on one way functions we'll look at how factoring is performed,
and why it's so hard on a classical computer.
We'll then look at how Shor's algorithm can
perform the same task, in a much more efficient manner.
First, at an intuitive level, and then Peter Shor, himself,
will present a deep dive on how his algorithm works.
Finally, we'll close out the week
with a case study that looks at prototype
experimental demonstrations of Shor's algorithm, to date.
