
Let us now go in-depth into the actual experimental
demonstration of quantum factoring with trapped ions.
Recall that this demonstration has four strategic goals.
First, to demonstrate fast feed-forward control,
the capability needed for quantum error correction
used in fault tolerant quantum computation.
Second, to integrate quantum memory
with quantum computation, noting that data memory
is a vital component of modern classical computation.
Third, to cascade a sizable number
of multi-qubit quantum gates deterministically
and with high fidelity.
And fourth, to demonstrate predictive modeling
of the system behavior allowing extrapolation to large scale
system performance.
These four goals are challenged by the following four issues.
First, the Quantum Fourier Transform
and the modular exponentiation circuit for the hard case
naively requires over 200 gates.
And even if the fidelity of each is around 99%,
the product of these is expected to have a fidelity lower
than 10%.
Second, multi-qubit gates, measurement,
and state initialization can be slow,
meaning that the total time required can exceed
a millisecond, which approaches the available quantum coherence
time.
Third, multi-qubit gate fidelities
typically decrease inversely with the number of qubits.
Fourth, measurement readout causes ions to fluoresce,
and this scattered light can decohere near ion qubits.
This experiment brings two main new ideas
to address these challenges.
These are a new way to use additional magnetic sub-levels
of electronic states as a quantum memory
and an algorithmic structure for the Quantum Fourier
Transform originally developed by Alexei Kitaev, which reduces
the number of qubits required.
We now go through the challenge for each
of the four goals starting with the first
to demonstrate feed-forward control.
For this, we employ Kitaev's version of the Quantum Fourier
Transform, which replaces the multi-qubit circuit
by a serial single-qubit circuit based on the fact
that the outputs are measured.
This example is for the 3-qubit QFT,
which is what we need for the factoring demonstration.
The trapped ion system is suitable for demonstrating
Kitaev's QFT because of the ability
to read out single qubits and to re-initialize and reset
qubit states, all within a given computation which
continues onward.
We test Kitaev's QFT using this 3-qubit circuit
with three different inputs.
Shown here are the experimental results in red
and the expected theoretical results in blue
for the three input states.
The expected outputs match the experimental data
with classical squared statistical output
fidelity of 95%.
This is much better than the full three ion qubit QFT
fidelity, due to the quantum memory performance
being higher than that of multi-qubit gates.
The second challenge goal to integrate quantum memory
with quantum computation is tested
by implementing the quantum order-finding algorithm.
Recall, this takes a permutation of N objects as input,
and finds the power r such that the permutation returns
to identity.
The quantum phase estimation circuit shown here
solves the problem with an exponential speed
up over the classical algorithm compared
by counting the number of uses of the permutation operation.

For permutations of N equal 4 objects,
this is the required quantum circuit.
And it simplifies to this 3-qubit quantum
circuit using Kitaev's Quantum Fourier Transform.
The experimental implementation of quantum order-finding
tested these four possible permutations
and produced these results shown in red,
which matched theoretical expectations shown in blue,
with fidelities of the 80% level.
The third challenge goal is to implement
both the easy and hard cases of Shor's quantum factoring
algorithm.
Recall that this algorithm is essentially
a special case of order-finding, where
the permutation is defined by this modular multiplication
function.
Shor's Algorithm begins with a random choice of a number a,
and the algorithm finds the order of a to the x mod N.
For factoring 15, there are two non-trivial choices
of a, namely 11 and 7, as we have seen.
The a equal 11 case is easy because it has a power of 2,
while the a equals 7 cases hard because it
has a longer period of 4.
We employ the Kitaev version of the QFT for the factoring
algorithm with 5 qubits, an extra quantum memory qubit
state and feed-forward control.
And observe that for the a equal 11 easy case,
only the controlled a multiplication need
be implemented, and that requires only two CNOT gates
realized using 16 laser pulses.
For the a equals 7 hard case, both the
controlled a and controlled a squared multiplications
must be implemented.
And after peephole compilation, which
only uses local information and is blind to the final result,
the circuits required involve two 3-qubit quantum Fredkin
gates and two CNOT gates, altogether needing 52 laser
pulses.
Such complex 3-qubit gates had not
been realized with trapped ion systems before this experiment.
Here are the experimental results
for the easy and hard cases of Shor's Algorithm.
The data shown in blue and the ideal noiseless
theoretical expectations shown in red agree to over 90%
for both cases.
Incidentally, this is an improvement
over the NMR implementation from 15 years ago,
which had much worse performance for the hard case
compared with the easy case.
The fourth challenge is to be able to predict
the actual results, taking into consideration
all known imperfections and noise
sources without fine tuning.
We developed a tool for this, known as TIQC-SPICE,
inspired by the similarly-named SPICE
tool important in simulating integrated electronic circuits.
TIQC-SPICE compiles quantum algorithms into laser pulses,
simulates the resulting ion internal and motional state
from the pulses, and analyzes performance
to produce the same metrics as obtained from the experiment.
Shown here, our experimental in red, ideal theoretical in blue,
and TIQC-SPICE simulated results in green for the easy and hard
cases of the quantum factoring demonstration.
The TIQC-SPICE results accurately
predict the experimental results to within error bars, including
four sources of major errors, namely addressing
of individual ions by laser beams, dephasing of ion states
due to fluctuations in the laser or magnetic field,
the spontaneous emission lifetime of the ion qubits,
and measurement and gate times.
In conclusion, the trapped ion demonstration
of quantum factoring provides a meaningful test of scalability
by demonstrating fast feed-forward control,
quantum memory interleaved with quantum computation,
multiple cascaded and deterministic
multi-qubit gates, and predictive simulation
of outputs using TIQC-SPICE.
These results indicate that scalability is largely
limited by technical and not fundamental issues.
For the future, we now understand
how modular multiplication circuits
can be realized using an algorithm known as the Quantum
Fourier Montgomery Multiplier as an elementary building block,
such that the factoring of an N bit number
would require 2n plus 2 qubits.
And on the order of N squared gates,
of which less than 3N and are 3-qubit
Toffoli gates, the hard ones to implement.
A feasible future experiment could thus
demonstrate the factoring of N equal 21
for which the hard case has a period of 6.
Using the Quantum Fourier Montgomery Multiplier circuit,
this would require 7 ions and 52 Molmer-Sorensen laser pulses.

Altogether, this experiment, while tiny compared with those
needed to break cryptographic codes,
shows how meaningful conclusions and serious extrapolations
can be drawn from this scientific endeavor.
