
ISAAC CHUANG: Shor's quantum factoring algorithm
has been implemented by a number of physical systems,
including trapped ions.
Let us consider what was done and why.
Perhaps the most important starting point
is to consider the question, what
is the smallest meaningful instance of the Shor quantum
factoring algorithm?
Recall that the intent of Shor's factoring algorithm
is to compute the period of this function--
f of x equals a to the x mod N. In this expression,
N is a number we wish to factor, x
is the argument to the function, and a is a random number which
is chosen that is co-primed to N.
It shares no prime factors in common with N.
The period of this function r allows us to find with some
probability-- a high probability--
a factor of N which is non-trivial.
Quantum factoring thus has as a goal finding this period r.
Solving this problem takes an amount of time,
or a number of operations, roughly proportional to L
cubed, where L is the number of digits of the number N.
Classically, using the best-known algorithm,
the time required, or number of operations required,
roughly goes as e to the 2L to the 1 over 3.
The difficulty of this factoring problem
is at the root of what secures widely-used cryptosystems
such as RSA.
To appreciate what the smallest meaning for instance
of Shor's quantum factoring algorithm is,
it is helpful to review the quantum
circuit for the algorithm.
Recall that there are two registers-- the top one here,
which holds the value x in a superposition
of all possible values, and a bottom
register where the result of the modular exponentiation is held.
The top register is then fed through a inverse quantum
Fourier transform, which returns the result.
There are three main steps in this procedure.
First, the input superposition of the top register
must be created.
Second, the modular exponentiation--
a to the x mod N--
must be computed.
This is the most difficult part of Shor's quantum factoring
algorithm because multi-qubit gates are required.
The third step is the quantum Fourier transform.
And because the result of the Fourier transform is measured,
only single-qubit gates--
some of them controlled by classical results--
are required in principle.
After the result is measured, there
is some classical post-processing.
And this can be done by essentially
any classical computer.
Now, the number we are factoring is N.
And it is clear that the algorithm is too trivial when
N is an even number--
that is, it has a factor which is 2.
Thus, the smallest meaningful factors are 3 and 5.
Here is a generic quantum factoring circuit
for the case of N equal 15, namely 3 times 5.
What makes this specific for N equal 15
is the choices available for the random base to be chosen a.
a must be coprime with N. In other words,
it must not share any factors with N.
And furthermore, it must be less than N.
And therefore, the only two meaningful cases
are a being 7 and 11.
Thus, the modular exponentiation circuit in the middle
reduces to looking like this, where
we have used repeated squaring, as is common,
to realize the modular exponentiation.
Note that each one of these exponentiations
is calculated mod 15.
So we began with a controlled multiplication
by a, then a controlled multiplication by a squared, a
to the fourth, a to the eighth, a to the 16th,
and so forth, all the way up to a to the 128th power.
Of course, the result of each of these multiplications
is still a number between 0 and 14
because of the modular multiplication being performed.
So there are two non-trivial possible values
of a that may be used in factoring 15.
I claim that one of these is easy to handle,
and the other is hard.
Why is this the case?
Well, let's see why by working out the two cases explicitly.
Consider the case of a being equal to 11.
Now, what we want is to take powers of a modulo 15.
a to the 1 is clearly equal to 11.
Now, if we multiply 11 by 11, we get 121.
That value modulo 15 is simply equal to 1.
And so the pattern continues to repeat.
If we multiply again by 11, we get 11 and then
1 and then 11 and 1.
So computing 11 to the x modulo 15
for any value of x is really easy because it only
requires one bit of x.
And thus, the quantum circuit looks simply like this.
Because the period is 2 in this case,
we find that the quantum circuit required is very simple.
All it is is a single controlled a multiplication circuit
with one bit of x involved-- the least significant bit.
And furthermore, since only two possible values
of multiplication by a matter--
11 and 1-- it is really tempting to replace
this controlled a by just a single controlled NOT gate.
And thus, this case is the easy one.
Now, consider the other case of a being equal to 7.
Here, we find 7 to the 1 is equal to 7.
7 squared is equal to 49.
Modulo 15 is equal to 4.
4 times 7 is 28.
28 modulo 15 is equal to 13.
13 times 7 modulo 15 gives us 1.
And thus, the period here is 4.
So the quantum circuit required needs two bits of x.
And thus, we find the quantum circuit is much less trivial.
It involves a controlled multiplication by 7,
as well as a controlled multiplication by 49 modulo 15.
In contrast to the a equal 11 case,
this circuit is much more complicated,
and thus, this is known as the hard case.
From this analysis, it is clear that only seven qubits
are needed to realize Shor's algorithm for factoring 15.
Here is the quantum circuit.
This circuit includes both the easy and the hard cases.
If we further consider what is needed
for the controlled multiplication
by a, as well as the controlled multiplication by a squared
modulo 15, we find that this sequence of gates suffices.
This includes two controlled NOT gates
for the easy case and four additional controlled NOT gates
and to Toffoli gates for the hard case.
Altogether, including the quantum Fourier transform
and the superposition creation Hadamard gates,
around 20 gates are required.
Of course, some of these are not elementary gates.
The Toffoli gates are three-qubit gates, controlled
controlled NOT gates, and they can
be very highly nontrivial to realize in a physical system.
The first realization of Shor's quantum factoring algorithm
was done with a nuclear magnetic resonance
system, as you have heard from Professor Lieven Vandersypen.
The NMR experiment did both the easy and the hard cases
and required around 200 pulses, each of these pulses realizing
some elementary operation, a sequence of which,
for example, realized the Toffoli gate.
This was done in 2001 at IBM.
More recently, in 2007, Shor's algorithm
was also realized using a linear optics setup.
However, only the easy case was implemented in that experiment,
thus, only three qubits were required,
and 13 elementary grades were performed.
Furthermore, this experiment required post-selection,
meaning that the results were only correct when
conditioned on a specific output being in a certain state.
The first solid-state qubit implementation
of Shor's algorithm was done with a superconducting qubit
system in 2012.
Again, this was for factoring the number 15
using three qubits and two controlled NOT gates.
A more complicated case factoring the number 21
was also done, this using linear optics quantum computing.
But again, only an easy case was performed,
with a four-qubit system and 26 gates, in 2011.
One of the lessons from these experiments
is that it is incredibly tempting to reduce the quantum
factoring algorithm into something
increasingly simple to realize with an experiment.
And, in fact, factoring almost any number
using a quantum algorithm can be done trivially
by choosing an a such that the period r is equal to 2.
In this case, the quantum circuit for Shor's algorithm
reduces to a very simple two-qubit circuit, shown here.
This illustrates the ridiculousness
of what happens when one compiles the quantum factoring
algorithm down too far.
This point is driven home by a beautiful article
by John Smolin, Graeme Smith, and Alex Vargo,
which appeared in Nature in 2013,
titled "Pretending to Factor Large Numbers on a Quantum
Computer."
They observed that actually running algorithms
on such tiny experiments is a somewhat frivolous endeavor
when such extreme compilation is performed.
So one has to be very careful in choosing
a meaningful instance of Shor's algorithm,
as well as a meaningful rendition of that instance
in a physical system.
If this is done, in fact, quantum factoring
can be a useful test of scalability.
One of the main points of the trapped ion quantum computing
realization was to show how Shor's algorithm can provide
a meaningful and stringent test of the scalability,
integration, classical control, and quantum control of quantum
computers.
In the trapped ion realization of Shor's quantum factoring
algorithm, there were four main goals.
First, when doing both the easy and hard cases,
it is clear that a cascade of multi-qubit gates is required.
And if each one of these gates fails with a small probability,
the cascade rapidly fails because
of the product of those probabilities decreasing
very fast.
So to achieve high-fidelity, non-pole selected,
deterministic output is a challenging goal to realize.
A second goal of the trapped ion demonstration
was to demonstrate the feed forward control needed
for the recipes used in fault-tolerant quantum
computation.
A third goal was to perform not just quantum computation
but also to integrate quantum memory with the quantum
computation.
And finally, one of the most important goals
of building a process for building quantum computers
is to be able to predict their performance in advance
of realizing the hardware.
And thus, one of the goals of the trapped ion demonstration
of Shor's quantum factoring algorithm
was to demonstrate such predictive modeling of expected
system behavior.
Altogether, this meant that the goal of the trapped ion quantum
computing realization of Shor's quantum factoring algorithm
was to use it as a strategic test of scalability elements.
