
So first I'll do the intuition, and then I'll do the math.
So it's a geometric sum, and it's
a whole bunch of points around the unit circle.
So we start with e to the minus 2 pi i x0.
Let's plot these points--
minus 2 pi i x0.
And now we go r, z over to the 2 to the 2l.
So the next one we want to plot is y equals 1.
So we go some distance around the circle.
And let's plot another point.
And then we plot another point, another point, another point.
We keep on going.

And what we get is quite possibly
points that are nearly exactly uniformly distributed
over the unit circle, sum close 0.
Well and next what happens is, here was e to the 2 pi i x0
2 to the 2l.
And here is e to the minus 2 pi i x0 plus rz zero over 2
to the 2l.
So unless what happens is when we plot the point,
we move around by the angle 2 pi i rz over 2 to the 2l.
And suppose this angle is tiny.
Well, what happens then is we get points
uniformly distributed.
Suppose it's tiny enough so that when we add all of these 2
to the l over r points, we get points that are--
you know, some kind of an arc, which doesn't even
go all the way around the unit circle--
sum is close to--

well, how many points were there?
There were 2 to the 2l over r.
And they were all pointing in more or less
the same direction.
So an absolute value.
So there's two cases here.

2 pi i yr--
If 2 pi i rz over 2 to the 2l is close to 1, which means y--
rz over 2 to the 2l is close to an integer.
And let's call that integer d.
So if this is close to an integer,
then we get a large probability of seeing this.
If it's not close to an integer we
get a tiny probability of seeing it.
So the geometric sum is 1 minus e to the 2 pi i.
We want the last term of the sum.
So that's 2 to the 2l rz over 2 to the 2l.

No, it's y goes from 1 to 2 to the 2l over r.
So the last term you substitute in 2 to the 2l r over z.
So something like 2 to the 2l over r.
I will have to take the floor of that times
r times z over 2 to the 2l.
Which really, because of this floor
could be anywhere on the unit circle.
But it's always less than 2 in absolute value.
And we're dividing that by 1 minus e to the 2 pi i rz
over 2 to the 2l.
And remember, the sum is really--
so we're dividing something by something else.
And it's going to be relatively small, unless the something
else we're dividing is really really, really close to 0.
So this is roughly something O of 1 divided by--
oh, what is this?
This is roughly rz over 2 to the 2l.

So the probability of seeing a number z is roughly rz over 2
to the 2l squared minus d because d was our integer.
So we have d over r is roughly z over 2 to the 2l.
So what our algorithm does is it output z.
We know 2 to the 2l, and we need to round it off
to something like d over r.
And there is a procedure for rounding
real numbers of two smaller fractions that is efficient.
And it's called continuous fractions.
But it's a classical algorithm.
So once we get this we can round it to d over r,
and then we're found r, which was
the period we were looking for.
