
How do you get factoring from order finding?
So first, let me say the second fastest classical algorithm is
the quadratic sieve.
So I’d say most classical algorithms…
So suppose you have N equals P times Q. Actually, they
work in more general cases, but we'll just worry
about the case of two products.
So the first step, really the only step,
the trick is to find x squared congruent to y
squared mod N x not congruent to plus or minus y mod N.
So suppose you're trying to factor 21.
You get 4 is congruent to 25 mod 21, right?
Because 25 minus 4 is a multiple of 21.
So 4, these are both squares.
And now we have 5 minus 2 times 5 plus 2
is congruent to zero mod 21.
And whenever this happens, one of these
contains P and the other contains Q.
Or rather, whenever neither of these is 0,
you have a product of two numbers, which is zero mod 21.
And so we know that the product has to contain three somewhere,
and it has to contain [INAUDIBLE] somewhere.
And if neither of these factors is 0 mod 21,
3 has to be contained in one factor and 7 in the other.
And then what you can do is you can use Euclid's algorithm
for gcd to get P and Q.
So whenever you get two squares, which are equal to each other,
you're essentially done.
And this is how the quadratic sieve works.
And that's the second fastest classical factoring algorithm
known.
How do we find x squared y squared?
Well, let's look at the function f of x equals g to the x mod N.
So this is periodic because if g to the r is congruent to 1,
then g to the x plus r is congruent to g to the x mod N.
Because if g to the r plus is congruent to 1,
then g to the x plus r congruent to g to the x--
because it's just multiplying both sides of this by g
to the x.
So that says that f of x is periodic.
I mean, it has to start repeating some time
because there are only N possible things here.
And whenever it starts repeating,
you get a g to the x plus r congruent to g to the x.
And that means g to the r is congruent to 1.
g to the r over 2 squared is congruent to 1
squared if r is even.
So let's do an example.
Suppose we're trying to factor 21.
So 2 to the 0, 2 to the first, 2 squared, et cetera.
So this is 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32.
32 minus 21 is 11, so the next column then is 11.
And 22 minus 21 is 1.
1.
So 2 to the sixth is congruent to 1 mod 21.
That means 2 cubed minus 1 minus times 2 cubed plus 1 is
congruent to 0 mod 21.
And this is 7 and this is 9.
And 7 contains the factor 7, 9 contains the factor 3.
So the question is how can this go wrong?
And well, there's a couple of things that could go wrong.
We could have started with 4.
4, 16.
16 squared, well, we know 2 to the sixth is congruent to 1 mod
21.
So 4 cubed is congruent to 1 mod 21.
So we get 4 cubed is congruent to 1 mod 21.
4 to the 3/2 doesn't exist.
Well, we can't compute it.
So this shows that 4 could go wrong.
The only thing that could go wrong is we could do this.
And when we look at the middle element, it's minus 1.
And that would be a problem because then we
have x is equal to minus y mod N.
And we can't use that, we can't use this trick then.
So some things can go wrong, but the great theorem
is probability of success with g to the xth
is greater than or equal to 1/2 for a random g between 0
or a random g less than N.
So you choose a random g less than N.
You do this repeated squaring.
And the probability this will work is at least 1/2.
And if it doesn't work, you choose another random g.
So eventually, with high probability,
you will get a g which lets you factor.
