
To date there have been a handful
of prototype demonstrations of Shor's Algorithm
using different qubit modalities, including
nuclear spins, photonic qubits, superconducting qubits,
and trapped ions.
In this case study, we'll look at two of these demonstrations
in detail.
The first is a demonstration of Shor's Algorithm
using liquid state nuclear magnetic resonance, NMR.
This was, in fact, the first such experimental demonstration
and it showed the factorization of 15 into the primes 3 times
5.
It used molecules with seven individually
addressable nuclear spins in liquid solution at room
temperature, and the algorithm comprised a sequence
of around 300 pulses.
We'll hear about this work from TU Delft Professor Lieven
Vendersypen, who performed these experiments as part of his PhD
thesis work at Stanford University in collaboration
with Ike Chuang, then at IBM Almaden.
The second demonstration is relatively recent
and it was performed using trapped ions.
In this case, seven ions were used to again factor the number
15 into primes 3 and 5.
In this example, modular multiplication
was implemented and no simplifications
that presumed prior knowledge of the result were employed.
Instead, a concept called qubit recycling
was used to make up for the fact that seven qubits is
insufficient to implement the general algorithm.
Still to date, this demonstration
constitutes the most realistic implementation
of Shor's Algorithm.
And we'll hear from MIT Professor Ike Chuang, who
participated in this demonstration with Professor
Rainer Blatt's team at Innsbruck.
To factor 15 in a straightforward manner,
it's estimated that one needs about 12 qubits, eight qubits
in the period register and four qubits
in the modular multiplication register.
The demonstrations you'll hear about in this case study
had fewer than 12 qubits, and so certain simplifications
had to be made.
Now in many cases, the simplifications
were quite reasonable.
For example, the use of qubit recycling.
Nonetheless, it's important to understand
the impact of various types of simplifying assumptions,
and we'll hear about them from IBM researcher Dr. John Smolin.
Finally, from a business perspective,
these prototype demonstrations of Shor's Algorithm
illustrate that quantum computing is real.
Although these implementations are not yet at scale,
they are concrete indications of and steps towards the promise
of quantum computing.
From an engineering perspective, these types of demonstrations
force groups to confront practical realities
of implementation, from qubit control engineering
to algorithmic compilation.
Although not yet at scale, these algorithms
motivate experimental groups to go
beyond scientific demonstrations and to meet face-to-face
with the practical realities that
will need to be accommodated to enable scalable quantum
computing.
And scientifically, these demonstrations
test our knowledge of system noise and decoherence.
Lastly, from a technology standpoint,
these demonstrations serve as a benchmark of progress
in the field, indicating where the technology currently stands
and clarifying what needs to be addressed in order to reach
future milestones.
And so with that brief introduction,
let's hear from Professor Lieven Vandersypen, Professor Ike
Chuang, and Dr. John Smolin.
