
In the last video, we presented Shor's Algorithm
in the context of the quantum circuit model.
We used two registers of qubits.
Register 1 was used to store the results of period finding,
and Register 2 was used to store the values
of the modular exponentiation function.
We then applied the Quantum Fourier Transform to Register 1
and measured the output.
The projected state that resulted
was a binary value of z, and its decimal value
was an integer multiple of 2 to the 2L divided by r.
This, in turn, can be used to find the period r using
a continued fraction expansion.
In this video, we'll take a closer
look at how the Quantum Fourier Transform
and the resulting quantum interference
lead us to this result. To see how this works,
we need to rewrite the sum over x as a combination of two sums.
We can use our example of a equal 3 and N
equal 10, which we saw has a period r equal 4.
We want to sum over all x from 0 to 2 to the 2L power minus 1.
The corresponding function f of x--
the modular exponentiation--
is calculated for several values of x, and the period
is, indeed, 4.
Let's call the values of x in the first period x0,
and the resulting values of the function f we'll call w.
We see that w has only four unique values
and that it repeats for values of x equal to x0 plus integer
multiples of the period r.
That is, x0 plus y times r, where we use y as the integer.
And for a given x0, the function f of x0 plus y r
is the same value, as indicated in orange for x0 equals 0.
We can see the same behavior for x0 equals 1 in green,
x0 equals 2 in blue, and x0 equals 3 in gray.
And we see that in doing this for the four values of x0,
we've covered all values of x.
Thus, we can rewrite the sum over x
as a sum over the four values of x0
and a sum over the integer y, which runs from 0 to 2
to the Lth power divided by r.
Together, these two sums run over all x values from 0 to 2
to the L minus 1.
Writing in this way enables us to see
how the quantum interference occurs with these phase
vectors.
We first replace omega with its explicit value,
e to the power i times 2 pi over 2 to the 2L.
And there are two phase factors here.
The first is a fixed phase offset independent
of the sum over y.
It will rotate the phase of any net result that
survives the sum.
The second is the quantum interference phase related
to the sum over y itself.
This sum is performed for every value of x0 and z,
and it's essentially a test to see if the value of z
is related to the period r when starting from a value x0.
The sum over y adds together vectors
with specific phases related to x0, z, r, and y.
Now, in most cases, these phases are not multiples of 2 pi,
and so the corresponding vectors,
according to their individual phases,
end up pointing in various directions, more or less
uniformly distributed around the unit circle.
Since they point in all directions,
adding these vectors together gives a net result of 0,
and this is another example of destructive quantum
interference.
Now, for a few specific cases where
z is related to r through x0, the phases
are a multiple of 2 pi.
When this is true, the corresponding vectors will
always point in the same direction-- to the right--
and thus add together constructively.
There are 2 to the 2L divided by r unit vectors,
and so the sum is 2 to the 2L divided by r.
Mathematically, the sum over y is a geometric sum.
I encourage you to calculate this for yourself
and find the condition which yields non-0 values.
You'll find the resulting condition
is that 2 pi over 2 to the 2L times z times r
is 2 pi times an integer, d.
Thus, it occurs when z equals d times 2
to the 2 L divided by r.
If we plot the probability at the output of the Quantum
Fourier Transform, we find a series
of spikes that occur when z equals d times 2
to the 2L over r.
The probability of measuring any one of these spikes
is 1 over r, since there are r spikes between 0 and 2
to the 2L over r.
This is for a specific value of x0.
Whichever one of these spikes we measure, the projected state
z with value d times 2 to the 2L over r
can be used to find the period r using a continued fraction
expansion procedure.
We won't discuss here in detail how that's done.
We just note that it's a known algorithm and it
can be effectively performed on a classical computer.
Now, we just saw how Shor's Algorithm can find the period
r, but how is this connected to the factoring problem in RSA?
Again, we'll take our example with N equal 10.
We want to find the prime factors p
and q that, multiplied together, equal 10.
To do this, we randomly pick a number, a,
that's smaller than N and relatively prime.
That is, their Greatest Common Divisor--
GCD-- is unity.
We'll again choose a equal 3.
We then use Shor's Algorithm to find the period
of a to the x modulo N.
Shor's Algorithm, with classical post-processing,
will efficiently give us the period r equal 4.
Before proceeding, we need to do a couple checks.
First, r must be an even number.
And second, we need to ensure that a
to the r over 2 power plus 1 does not equal 0 modulo N.
If we fail either of these tests,
we need to go back to step 1 and pick another value of a.
But in our case here, we're OK.
For a equal 3 and r equal 4, both conditions check,
and we can proceed.
We know that a to the r equals 1 modulo N,
as this is a property of modular exponentiation.
We can rewrite this expression as a to the r-th power minus 1
equals k times N for an integer, k.
We then replace N with the unknown prime factors p and q,
and we factor the left-hand side to yield a to the r over 2
minus 1 times a to the r over 2 plus 1.
It follows, then, that p and q can
be found from the greatest common divisor
of a to the power r over 2 plus or minus 1 and N.
Let's take them one at a time.
a to the power r over 2 minus 1 is 8.
And so the greatest common divisor of 8 and 10 is 2,
so p equals 2.
Then a to the r over 2 plus 1 is 10,
and so the greatest common divisor of 10 and 10
that's not trivial is 5, so q will equal 5.
Therefore, p equals 2, q equals 5--
both are prime numbers, and p times q equals 10.
Now, this is, of course, a very simple example,
but it illustrates how Shor's Algorithm and period
finding can be used to calculate prime numbers p and q,
and thus calculate the private decryption key
and compromise the RSA cryptosystem.
More details and background information
related to these topics can be found in the following text
units and also in the Deep Dive on Shor's Algorithm
from Professor Peter Shor.
