
I discovered the factoring algorithm
after seeing Simon's algorithm before before Simon's algorithm
actually got published.
And I'm going to show you--
write down a circuit diagram so you can see the similarity.
So Simon's algorithm, remember, we started with n qubits
in the plus.
And then we went, and here is a black box
that computes 0 to the n.
From x, it computes f of x.
And then we did a Hadamard transform
to the n, which is just the  quantum Fourier transform over
the group of two elements  to the n-th power.
So n copies of the group of two elements.
So this is just binary strings under addition without carries.
And after that, I believe you measured this register,
and then did classical post-processing.
So what is factoring?
So what we're not going to do directly
is a quantum algorithm  for factoring.
We're going to do a quantum algorithm for order finding--
quantum algorithm  for periodicity.
So suppose we have  a function over
integers, f of x is equal to f of x plus c for some c.
And here you can  see that f of x 2c
equals f of x plus 3c, et cetera.
So it's a periodic  function, and a period is--
well, I'm calling it C right now,
but at some point during this lecture,
I'm going to start calling it r because that's
what I'm used to calling it.
Find c.

Now you might  think this is easy.
You just start with f of 0, f of 1, f of 2, f of 3,
and keep on going until  f starts repeating.
So even if period is exponentially long.
And that means that if you want to try
to find a period of length r, we can do this length polynomial
and log of r.

So we can find the period.
And on the classical computer, if you have a black box
function, the best you can do  is just keep on testing values
until it starts repeating.
So that means the best you can do is period r.
And in quantum mechanics,  quantum computing,
you can do log r.
So it's going to be exponentially long in a period
of a number, we want to factor.
But if we're just finding period--

find period in time O of log c.

So we will be able to find the period and time--
well, that's actually going to be quicker than log c if we
really want to do it quicker.
Log c squared if we want to do  it quicker because we can not
use the exact quantum Fourier transform,
but the approximate quantum Fourier transform,
which has like log c, log log c gates..
But here, so we want  to find a period.
We have a black box function for f.
And f has some period of c.
So what is the quantum algorithm for this?
Well, we're going to do exactly the same thing here.
We're going to start at plus to the c, 0, the n here.

And here we have a  black box function,
which if you put in  x, it computes f of x.
Or actually, it computes--
well, remember this took x, t to x, t xr f of x.
We can assume this does the same thing.
x, t to x t xr f of x.
And now here's the only difference, really,
between the circuits.
We use the quantum for each transform over 2 to the--
actually, let's do this right.
There's 2n.
We want 2n qubits here, n qubits here.
Quantum Fourier transform over 2 to the n.
And then we measure.
And then we do classical  post-processing.
So it looks very similar.

So let's go into the detail--
yeah?
In both these cases, what happens to the bottom branch?
We do nothing to the bottom branch.
I mean, if we want to, we  could measure the bottom branch
and throw away the results.
Or we don't have to.
Because if you measure something and throw away the results,
it doesn't matter whether or not you measure it.
But we do need to compute it.
Because if you don't compute  it, what have we done?
We've taken the Hadamard transform of x to the n.
That's just all 0's.
So if you don't compute f of x, it
destroys the interference in the upper half.
Again, action in a quantum  circuit has back action.
