
Let me now share with you a description
of the trapped ion quantum computing system employed
for the demonstration of Shor's quantum factoring algorithm.
Two energy levels of an atom can be employed as a qubit.
But it's ordinarily very hard to hold onto a single atom
and not lose it.
On the other hand, if an electron
is removed from the atom it becomes
a positively charged ion, which is
much easier to trap and hold.
Calcium 40 is a common ion which can be trapped in this way
and employed for quantum computation because
of its internal level structure.
The so-called D5/2 and S1/2 levels of calcium 40
make excellent two-- level systems usable
as a qubit because of its approximately one
second lifetime, and because the transition can
be excited by photons, which is accessible to the solid state
lasers.
In reality, however, the atom has other energy levels
also involved.
For example, the higher energy P3/2 level
can connect with the D5/2 level via an 854 nanometer
optical transition.
The P3/2 level can also decay to the S1/2 ground
state via a short wavelength 393 nanometer optical transition.
This produces a closed cycle, which
is useful for controlling the ion's motion.
This cycle and the short wavelength photon emitted
are also employed to measure the qubit state since this emission
occurs if the qubit is in the S1/2 state
but not in the D5/2 state.
Two additional levels, the P1/2 and D3/2 levels
also form a closed cycle and provide the primary transitions
used for laser cooling of the ion.
How the ion itself is trapped, however,
only involves its charge.
Consider a single ion.
Trapping is accomplished based on the following idea.
Surround the ion with four electrodes shown here
in cross-section.
Two additional end cap electrodes in front and in back
are not pictured.
These metal electrodes hold positive and negative charges
via electrical voltage is applied.
Opposite charges attract and equal charges repel.
But if the ion were exactly in the middle,
all forces would balance.
More likely than not, an ion would initially
be off center and thus it would move towards the nearest
oppositely charged electrode such as the negatively
charged one on the upper left.
As the ion moves, we change voltages such
that the close electrode becomes positive,
repelling the ion before it reaches the electrode.
The ion then moves onward, for example,
to the next closest negative electrode on the bottom left.
Again, we change voltages to keep the ion dancing around,
never reaching one of the electrodes, always confined
within the region defined by the electrodes.
This idea is at the heart of the physical process
for which Wolfgang Paul was awarded the 1989 Nobel
Prize in physics.
Shown on the left is a picture of an actual four electrode
quadripolar linear ion guide, which
can be employed as an ion trap when the end cap electrodes are
added.
By applying lasers, which cool the motion of the ion using
its internal level structure, the trapped ions
can be made to come to rest at the very center
of the electrical potential.
Such trapping and cooling has been demonstrated
with a wide variety of atomic and molecular ions,
including strontium, beryllium, ytterbium, barium, magnesium,
calcium, and others.
Physical parameters determined by the lasers
and by the atomic structure determine how cold the ions get
and how cooling competes with heating processes.
For scalable quantum computation,
the quadripolar ion structure can be simplified as follows.
First, imagine rotating the electrode configuration
by 90 degrees.
Next, envision replacing the three lower
electrodes with three coplanar electrodes beneath the ion.
The top electrode becomes a top metallic conductor,
which may be far away or part of the confining vacuum chamber.
This configuration still traps ions.
Lasers can be applied from the side
just as before for cooling and also to perform quantum gates.
Moreover, the substrate can be cooled, for example,
to liquid helium temperatures, to allow integration
with devices such as superconducting electronics.
This substrate can be micro-fabricated
with modern semiconductor lithography techniques
with geometries that include sophisticated patterning
in the third dimension, such as the segmented structures shown
here, comoving ions.
A wide variety of such surface electrode ion traps
have now been realized in laboratories around the world,
including six pictured here from research groups
at the University of Mainz, MIT, Maryland, Sussex, Sandia
National Lab, and NIST.
Designs for trapped ion chips include
ones fabricated using sophisticated modern
semiconductor line processes such as this one fabricated
by Lucent Technologies and pictured installed in a vacuum
chamber at MIT.
The ion trapped chips have also been
operated at cryogenic temperatures,
including this one made of silver
on quartz used at MIT to trap crystals of strontium ions,
shown here with one, two, three, four,
and over 20 individual atomic ions visible in the CCD image.
The quantum factoring demonstration with trapped ions
was carried out in this laboratory
at the University of Innsbruck.
Pictured here from photos I took during our opening
collaboration in 2001, the ion trap
here is a macroscopic hand machined quadripolar trap
at the center of these magnetic field coils.
This shows the same setup from another angle showing
the optical components needed to guide all the laser
beams to the trapped ions.
And this is the control computer and electronics
used to generate the frequency and amplitude controlled laser
pulses, which perform quantum operations on the ion state.
I learned the art of ion trapping
from Professor Dr. Rainer Blatt, shown here in his office
at the University of Innsbruck in Austria.
His group and that led by Dr. David Wineland at NIST
set the standard for the field, as well as
the character of scientific openness and collaboration
that shaped the field of trapped ion quantum information science
today.
The trapped ion quantum factoring demonstration
was done with a linear ion chain of five calcium
ions, each of which has the internal level structure shown
earlier and reproduced here.
Recall that the qubit transition is
between the D5/2 level and the ground state S1/2 level.
Laser pulses focused on individual ions
realize single qubit rotations addressed at individual qubits.
The laser is typically tuned to affect rotations
about the qubit's z axes.
Multi-qubit collective gates are realized
either by applying a monochromatic laser
beam to multiple ions, which implements
in parallel many single qubit rotations,
or by applying two simultaneous laser frequencies tuned such
that a multi-qubit gate operation is
realized, known as the Molmer-Sorensen gate,
after its inventors.
This is the mathematical form of the gate, which
you can learn more about in the MITx 8422 xOnline course
sequence on atomic physics.
The basic set of Molmer-Sorensen collective spin flip
and individual light shift operations available
can be combined to realize arbitrary multi-qubit quantum
gates.
For example, the quantum Toffoli gate
can be realized as this sequence of five collective three
Molmer-Sorensen and three single qubit light shift gates.
How well do the traps and gates work in practice?
Here are performance numbers for the system
employed for the quantum factoring demonstration.
The system was demonstrated to reliably trap
up to 14 ions with state preparation of 99.5%
fidelity, taking a few milliseconds
for each preparation, routinely realizing T1 and T2 coherence
times of one second and five seconds respectively.
Requiring about 400 microseconds for a quantum state measurement
when using a photomultiplier tube, and between 20 and 45
microseconds to realize single and multi-qubit gates,
which have gate fidelities of over 99%
for single-qubit operations, and between 99% and 94%
for two and five ion gates.
Additional energy levels within the ions
can also be employed as quantum memories
with storage fidelity of 99.5% and write times
of 45 microseconds.
