
In the last section, we looked at a specific implementation
of public key cryptography-- the RSA cryptosystem.
The security of RSA is based on the use of a one-way function--
prime factorization--
which is related to the problem of period finding
in modular exponentiation.
As we saw, if one picks two prime numbers, p and q,
which multiply together to give a modulus N,
then one can efficiently find the modular exponentiation
period r, and thus generate a public encryption key e
and a private decryption key d.
However, if we're just given the modulus N,
then we're stuck, because there's
no known efficient classical algorithm that
lets us find the prime factors p and q,
and so there's no efficient means to determine
the period r.
Thus, even if we reveal the modulus
N and the public encryption key e,
there is no known efficient way for an eavesdropper
to calculate the private key d on a classical computer.
However, if Eve has access to a quantum computer
that can run Shor's Algorithm, then she
can efficiently find the modular exponentiation period r.
This is called order finding, and Shor's Algorithm
finds the order r of a number a with respect
to the modulus N, where a is the number that
is raised to integer powers under modular exponentiation.
With a means to efficiently determine r,
Eve can calculate the prime numbers p
and q and then derive the decryption key d,
thus compromising RSA.
In this section, we'll walk through Shor's Algorithm
using the quantum circuit model presented in Course 1.
We'll then continue with our simple example
of modular exponentiation to see the connection between order
finding and factorization.
Let's begin with the initialization stage.
We need two registers of qubits for Shor's Algorithm.
Roughly speaking, Register 1 is used
to store the results of a period finding
protocol, which is implemented using the Quantum
Fourier Transform.
We'll discuss that one in a moment.
Register 2 is used to store the values
of the modular exponentiation.
This is the function that will apply in the compute section.
The number of qubits in the first register
should generate a state space that is at least large enough
to capture the maximum possible period,
and do so at least twice to see it repeat.
Let's define N as twice the maximum period.
So we need at least L qubits, such that 2 to the L power
is greater than N.
Now, in fact, the more qubits we have, the more densely
we can sample the solution space,
and thereby reduce the error in determining the period.
Here, we'll take 2L qubits for the first register.
And for simplicity, we'll use the same number of qubits
in the second register.
By choosing 2L qubits, the number of states--
2 to the 2L power--
is greater than N squared.
This guarantees that there are at least N terms contributing
to the probability amplitude when estimating the period,
even as the period r gets exponentially large,
approaching N over 2.
We prepare the qubits in state 0,
which we denote with a superscripted tensor
product, 2L.
As we did in Course 1 for the Deutsch-Jozsa algorithm,
we'll track the register states by color--
yellow for Register 1, and green for Register 2.
And we'll track our current position
within the algorithm using the vertical line.
Next, at the compute stage, we use Hadamard gates
to place the Register 1 qubits into an equal superposition
state.
We again use the superscripted tensor product notation
to indicate that we apply a Hadamard
gate to each of the 2L qubits.
This puts each qubit into a superposition state, 0 plus 1.
Multiplying out all 2L of these single qubit superposition
states results in a single large equal superposition state
with 2 to the 2L components.
From a component with 2L qubits in state
0 to a component with all qubits in state 1,
and with all combinations in between.
If we now number these components from 0 to 2
to the 2L minus 1, we can rewrite the superposition state
as a sum over x.
In fact, each decimal number x corresponds
to one of the binary numbers represented by the 2L qubits.
Next, the function f is performed.
f of x implements modular exponentiation, which
outputs a number a to the x power modulo N.
We won't present in detail how the modular exponentiation is
implemented in a real circuit.
In fact, there are multiple approaches
to doing it based on reversible computing and multiplication
algorithms.
For our purposes here, we just note
that this function can be implemented
using ancilla qubits and that it's efficient,
requiring a number of gates that scales only polynomially
with the number of qubits.
Now, the number a is chosen at random,
and it must be co-prime with N. That
is, it must have no common factors with N. The resulting
output values from the function f
are then stored in the Register 2 qubits.
Since the values of the power x are taken from the qubits
in the first register, implementing
f of x makes a conditional connection
between the qubits in Register 1 and those in Register 2.
Although we ultimately won't need
to measure the qubits in Register 2,
this step sets the stage for quantum interference
and quantum parallelism to occur in Register 1
at the next step, which is the Quantum Fourier Transform.
The Quantum Fourier Transform is a quantum version
of the classical discrete time Fourier Transform.
The classical Fourier Transform takes a vector of numbers, x--
often a digital sampling of a signal to be analyzed--
and transforms it to a vector of numbers, y, in the frequency
domain.
Periodic behavior in the time domain
is more easily identified in the transformed frequency domain,
which is why we do this.
For example, a sine wave that oscillates in time
with a specific frequency will transform to a large amplitude
spike at plus or minus that frequency
in the transform domain.
Thus, it's easy to identify the location of the spikes
and then read off the frequency directly.
And if we know a signal's frequency,
then we also know its period, since the frequency
is 1 over the period.
Now, the Quantum Fourier Transform
is essentially the same transformation,
which is why we'll use it here for period finding.
It takes a state j and transforms it
to a superposition state with specific phase factors.
If we start with a superposition state with coefficients xj,
the transformed result is also a superposition state
with coefficients yk, where the probability amplitudes
yk are the classical discrete time Fourier
Transform of the probability amplitudes xj.
And due to quantum parallelism and quantum interference,
implementing the Quantum Fourier Transform
is exponentially faster than implementing
the classical fast Fourier Transform algorithm.
Now, that sounds great, but there's an important catch
related to quantum measurement.
As you know, the measurement of a quantum state
is probabilistic.
Although the output of the Quantum Fourier Transform
is a large superposition state with transformed probability
amplitudes, we generally can't access those amplitudes.
Our measurement projects out only a single state,
and even if we identically prepare the system
and measure it many times, we only
learn about the magnitude squared
of the corresponding coefficients.
We lose the phase information.
So we don't have access to the probability amplitudes
in the quantum computer, and this
is quite different from the classical Fourier
Transform where the entire output
vector of complex numbers can be directly read.
Thus, the Quantum Fourier Transform
is most useful in problems where there's
a unique period or phase that can
be found with high probability.
For now, let's return to Shor's Algorithm.
The Quantum Fourier Transform is applied here
to the qubits in Register 1, and it
imparts specific phase factors that
are related to both x and z.
That is, they're related to both the coefficients
of the qubits on Register 1 and the modular exponentiation
stored on Register 2.
The phase sampling increment is represented here by omega,
and it's the phase 2 pi divided by the total number of states--
2 to the 2L power.
Here we can see that increasing the number of qubits
will reduce the step size, and thus the error
in estimating the actual period.
Essentially, more qubits will more
densely sample the phases that represent the period.
Lastly, we measure the qubits in Register 1.
The projected state that results is a binary value of z,
and its decimal value is equal to or an integer multiple of 2
to the 2Lth power divided by r.
Thus, it can be used to find the period
r using a continued fraction expansion of z divided
by 2 to the 2L.
You can learn more about the Quantum Fourier
Transform and related topics in the text
units following this video.
And in the next video, we'll take a closer look
at how the Quantum Fourier Transform mediates
the quantum interference terms that constructively converge
to estimates for the period r.
